A Vision of the Future 
LITHUANIAN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE STRATEGY
2 LITHUANIAN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE STRATEGY
„
”
          Artificial intelligence (AI) refers to systems that display 
intelligent behavior by analyzing their environment and taking 
actions – with some degree of autonomy – to achieve specific 
goals.
 AI-based systems can be purely software-based, acting 
in the virtual world (e.g. voice assistants, image analysis 
software, search engines, speech and face recognition 
systems) or AI can be embedded in hardware devices (e.g. 
advanced robots, autonomous cars, drones, or Internet of 
Things applications).
3LITHUANIAN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE STRATEGY
19
16
A RESPONSIBLE AND EFFICIENT APPROACH TO DATA
14
GROWTH OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE RESEARCH AND 
DEVELOPMENT
11
NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT OF SKILLS AND COMPETENCIES NEEDED 
FOR A FUTURE WITH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
10
INTEGRATION OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE SYSTEMS ACROSS ALL 
ECONOMIC SECTORS
8
A BREAK DOWN OF LITHUANIA’S POSITION IN THE AI ECOSYSTEM
8
ETHICAL AND LEGAL CORE PRINCIPLES FOR THE 
DEVELOPMENT AND USE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
6
KEY SECTIONS
SUMMARY OF THE AI LANDSCAPE IN LITHUANIA
5INTRODUCTION
4EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
CONTENT
4 LITHUANIAN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE STRATEGY
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The following document constitutes an 
analysis of Lithuania’s prospective with artificial 
intelligence systems and presentation of strategic 
recommendations for government consideration.
In the fall of 2018, a group of experts began 
meeting with the Ministry of Economy of the 
Republic of Lithuania to discuss the impact of 
artificial intelligence technologies. The group, 
whose purpose is to guide and advise on the 
contents of this document, consisted of expert 
representatives from the private sector, public 
sector and academia (see Appendix A). The 
Lithuanian Artificial Intelligence Strategy: A Vision 
of the Future seeks to communicate the current 
position and future strategic vision of the Republic 
of Lithuania in regard to artificial intelligence. 
The report first begins with an introduction that 
defines artificial intelligence as a field of computer 
science. Once the definition is established, there 
will be an overview of how AI is impacting the 
global economy, followed by an overview of the 
current landscape in Lithuania in regard to AI. The 
landscape presents the strengths and weaknesses 
of AI in Lithuania, and serves as a base for the 
establishment of the recommendations contained 
later in the report. After the introduction, the 
report moves into the key sections: [1] Ethical 
and legal core principles for the development 
and use of artificial intelligence; [2] A break down 
of Lithuania’s position in the AI ecosystem, [3] 
Integration of artificial intelligence systems across 
all economic sectors, [4] National development 
of skills and competencies needed for a future 
with artificial intelligence, [5] Growth of Artificial 
Intelligence Research and Development, [6] A 
responsible and efficient approach to data. Each 
section represents a different area the Republic 
of Lithuania will target in order to accomplish the 
strategic goal set hereby set forth:    and expand
The results and findings of this report 
are represented by a series of strategic 
recommendations for the government 
of the Republic of Lithuania. The 
recommendations are organized in the 
form of mechanisms, which are specific 
actions, programs and initiatives. Successful 
execution of these recommendations will 
ensure Lithuania utilizes the full economic 
potential of artificial intelligence systems, 
while avoiding possible societal pitfalls. 
Introduction
“TO MODERNIZE 
AND EXPAND 
THE CURRENT AI 
ECOSYSTEM IN 
LITHUANIA AND 
ENSURE THAT THE 
NATION IS READY 
FOR A FUTURE WITH 
AI.”
5LITHUANIAN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE STRATEGY
INTRODUCTION
“ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (AI) REFERS TO SYSTEMS THAT DIS-
PLAY INTELLIGENT BEHAVIOR BY ANALYZING THEIR ENVIRON-
MENT AND TAKING ACTIONS – WITH SOME DEGREE OF AUTONO-
MY – TO ACHIEVE SPECIFIC GOALS. 
“AI-BASED SYSTEMS CAN BE PURELY SOFTWARE-BASED, ACTING 
IN THE VIRTUAL WORLD (E.G. VOICE ASSISTANTS, IMAGE ANALY-
SIS SOFTWARE, SEARCH ENGINES, SPEECH AND FACE RECOGNI-
TION SYSTEMS) OR AI CAN BE EMBEDDED IN HARDWARE DEVIC-
ES (E.G. ADVANCED ROBOTS, AUTONOMOUS CARS, DRONES, OR 
INTERNET OF THINGS APPLICATIONS).” 
DEFINITION 
Artificial intelligence (AI) is a diverse field of 
computer science that is constantly evolving. 
While any brief description will fail to capture all of 
the nuances and capabilities of AI, it is important 
that an agreed upon definition is defined before 
moving on to any further analysis. For the 
purposes of this report, we will be using the 
most recent definition released by the European 
Commission on AI:
 
This definition is not meant to be a complete 
representation of artificial intelligence. Rather, it 
will be used as a launching point to base the ideas 
of this report off of. 
GLOBAL IMPACT OF AI
If current growth trends continue, artificial 
intelligence has the potential to become one of 
the main contributors to global economic growth. 
According to the “Artificial Intelligence is the 
future of growth” report done by Accenture, AI 
can help double annual economic growth rates, 
boost labor productivity, and shorten the timeline 
to growth with various degrees of effectiveness 
for most countries. Global economies are looking 
to capitalize on this potential growth. Countries 
looking to become forerunners in new technology 
have developed national strategies aimed at 
promoting the growth of AI. 
The European Union is taking initiative with a 
coordinated plan on AI that was released in 
December of 2018. The main goal of the plan is 
“for Europe to become the world-leading region 
for developing and deploying cutting-edge, 
ethical and secure AI, promoting a human-centric 
approach in the global 
context.” The member 
states taking the 
lead on this currently 
include France, Finland, 
Sweden and Germany. 
Each strategy takes 
a different approach 
when targeting AI 
policy with focus on 
scientific research, 
talent development, 
skills and education, 
public and private sector adoption, ethics and 
inclusion, standards and regulations, and data 
and digital infrastructure. Furthermore the EU 
High-Level Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence 
is publishing AI ethics guidance document that 
will include recommendations on how member 
states and create trustworthy AI with a human-
centric approach. The draft for this document 
was published in December of 2018 with 
the finalization happening in March of 2019. 
Stakeholders and member states are encouraged 
to voluntarily endorse the guidelines and they 
should serve as starting point for the discussion 
for ethical AI. 
6 LITHUANIAN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE STRATEGY
SUMMARY OF THE 
AI LANDSCAPE IN 
LITHUANIA
Lithuania is also ready to move forward with 
it’s own strategic plan for the future of artificial 
intelligence. In the fall of 2018, a group of private 
and public sector representatives began meeting 
with the Ministry of Economy and Innovation in 
Lithuania to discuss the current AI landscape 
and discuss plans for the way forward. The group 
consists of industry leaders, academic experts and 
government representatives, all with knowledge 
on the Lithuanian AI ecosystem. A Landscape 
Report released by the group in November 
of 2018 highlights both the key areas where 
Lithuania is successful in AI and where there is 
room for growth. The group is responsible for 
reviewing and approving the strategic guidelines 
and recommendations in this report. 
This section highlights some of the key findings 
of the analysis done for the Landscape Report 
in order to create understanding of the current 
situation of AI in Lithuania. The Landscape Report 
is separated into 4 parts: Academic Ecosystem, 
Industry, Financial and Community. Each part 
showed a set of strengths and challenges and 
is used as evidence for the development of the 
ideas. 
7LITHUANIAN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE STRATEGY
In 2017, Information and Communications 
Technology (ICT) programs in universities were 
the fourth most popular choice for students, 
showing that there is significant interest from 
students in Lithuania to pursue technology as 
a field of study. The main institutions leading 
the charge on AI research and development are 
Vilnius University, Vytautas Magnus University 
and Kaunas University of Technology. Where AI is 
concerned, the areas of focus are deep learning, 
data mining, natural language processing, game 
development, computer vision and robotics. 
While there are no unique bachelors, masters or 
PhD program for artificial intelligence, relevant 
coursework is deeply integrated into the computer 
science majors. Another obstacle is the lack of the 
sophisticated hardware needed for students to 
conduct research in AI systems. 
The industry portion mainly focused on the 
artificial intelligence industry itself. In total, there 
were 39 SMEs engaged in AI product research 
and delivery. 89% of these were engaged in B2B 
product delivery. There is a significant amount 
of companies originating in Lithuania, as well 
as international companies with offices in the 
country engaged in AI systems development. The 
SMEs are developing products that cover a wide 
range of industries: Development & IT, Internal 
Data and Intel, Security, Human Resources, IOT, 
Computer Vision, Research, Language Processing, 
AR/VR, Analytics and Insights, Advanced Targeting, 
Agriculture, Medical Imaging and Biometrics.
ACADEMIC: 
INDUSTRY: 
FINANCIAL: 
COMMUNITY: 
There are a few channels for receiving financial 
investment for AI projects and startups. In the 
period between 2015 and 2018, public sector 
investment in AI was more significant than private 
sector with a total of EUR 26.5 million and EUR 3.2 
million respectively. In total 39 different AI projects 
received funding from Ministry of Economy and 
Innovation initiatives, totaling EUR 12.5 million 
since 2016. When combined with private capital 
brought in, the total value of projects for the last 
three years was over EUR 20 million. Almost all 
of the submitted projects that were approved 
received funding greater than or equal to 50 
percent of the total value of the project. AI 
academic research projects also received EUR 
6.5 million under the Ministry of Education and 
Science. Private investment came primarily from 
venture capital firms with varying origins including 
Lithuania, United States, France and Russia.
Lithuania has an active artificial intelligence 
community with a handful of regular events and 
meetups bringing together the professionals 
working the field. Around 1000-1500 people 
are attending these events, with 300-500 active 
working professionals. 
8 LITHUANIAN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE STRATEGY
KEY SECTIONS
The focus of Lithuanian national strategic plan for artificial intelligence is split into six key 
sections: 
[1] Ethical and legal core principles for the development and use of artificial intelligence; [2] 
A break down of Lithuania’s position in the AI ecosystem, 
[3] Integration of artificial intelligence systems across all economic sectors, 
[4] National development of skills and competencies needed for a future with artificial 
intelligence, 
[5] Growth of Artificial Intelligence Research and Development, 
[6] A responsible and efficient approach to data.
[1] ETHICAL AND LEGAL CORE PRINCIPLES FOR 
THE DEVELOPMENT AND USE OF ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE
Having the capability to generate tremendous benefits for individuals and society, AI also gives rise 
to certain risks that should be properly managed. Given that, on the whole, AI’s benefits outweigh its 
risks, we must ensure to follow the road that maximizes the benefits of AI while minimizing its risks. To 
ensure that we stay on the right track, a human-centric approach to AI is needed. Trustworthy AI has 
two components: (1) ethical purpose - it should respect fundamental rights, applicable regulation and 
core principles and values and (2) it should be technically robust and reliable since, even with good 
intentions, a lack of technological mastery can cause unintentional harm.
This Document therefore sets out a framework of core strategically principles and main mechanisms 
for further ethical and legal regulation for the development and use of Trustworthy AI in Lithuania:
POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS: 
1. PRINCIPLE TO ADVICE THE PUBLIC SECTOR ON ETHICAL AI REGULATION AND 
IMPLEMENTATION.
Mechanism: Establish AI ethics committee that reviews impact of technology on 
fundamental rights. 
The committee should include representatives from academia, government, industry 
and NGO sector.
The committee should provide (independently created) short and long-term analysis 
9LITHUANIAN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE STRATEGY
and recommendations. These recommendations should be used to create and update 
existing ethical standards in Lithuania.
The committee should foster the development of AI-related skills in the public 
administration.
Mechanism: Develop feedback mechanisms for societal input on regulations created 
by the public administration. 
Mechanism: Government should recognize citizens’ “understanding of AI as a new civic 
skill.”
2. PRINCIPLE    TO ESTABLISH TRUST IN THE RULES, LAWS AND NORMS THAT GOVERNS 
AI.
It should be noted that currently there still is ethical and legal vacuum in Lithuania, but 
there is no legal vacuum in Europe, as Europe already has some regulation in place that 
applies to AI.
Mechanism: Lithuania needs to develop rules, standards, guidelines, norms and ethics 
principles in order to guide ethical and sustainable development of AI and use of AI.
Mechanism: Lithuania needs to work for Lithuanian, European and international 
standards and regulations that promote the use of AI and prevent risks.
Mechanism: As advances bring greater linkages between humans and AI systems, 
Lithuania needs to establish governing principles and policies for the study of best 
practices for design, construction, and use, including proper operator training for safe 
operation.
Mechanism: Lithuania needs additional investments to advance AI safety and security, 
including explainability and transparency, trust, verification and validation, security 
against attacks, and long-term AI safety and value-alignment.
3. PRINCIPLE    TO ENCOURAGE TRANSPARENCY AND FAIRNESS IN AI APPLICATIONS.
AI applications should be ethical, safe, reliable and transparent. Achieving effective 
interactions between humans and AI systems requires additional R&D to ensure that the 
system design and the use of data does not lead to excessive complexity, undertrust, or 
overtrust. The familiarity of citizens with the AI systems can be increased in many ways, 
to ensure that the human has a good understanding of the AI system’s capabilities and 
what the AI system can and cannot do. To address these concerns, certain human-
centered mechanism should be improved.
Mechanism: Support research to minimize bias in AI systems.
Mechanism: Create quality marks for relevant companies that abide by standards set 
forth by AI ethics committee. Publish results publicly. 
Mechanism: Facilitate the creation of a national interdisciplinary center on AI to promote 
discussions surrounding the ethics of AI.
10 LITHUANIAN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE STRATEGY
Mechanism: Many algorithms, including those based on deep learning, are opaque to 
users; thus, Lithuania needs to establish the safeguarding mechanism that researchers 
would develop systems that are transparent, and intrinsically capable of explaining the 
reasons for their results to users.
4. PRINCIPLE    TO ENCOURAGE ETHICS BY DESIGN. 
Mechanism: Encourage schools at the high school level to discuss ethical implications 
of technology. 
Mechanism: Encourage universities to develop courses on the ethical implications 
of technology for as many disciplines as possible. Ethical education must constitute 
integral part of higher technical and non-technical education in AI and related programs 
of universities and colleges.
Mechanism: Request University IT and engineering programs to take a course on the 
ethics of technology.
Mechanism: Facilitate society-wide discussion of AI and its ethical implications.
Mechanism: Develop mediation capabilities to support vulnerable populations.
Mechanism: Actively work with the principles on data infrastructure to ensure protection 
of privacy and security.
[2] A BREAK DOWN OF LITHUANIA’S POSITION IN THE 
AI ECOSYSTEM.
This section seeks to strengthen Lithuania’s national and international AI network through two different 
cross-sections: conception of place and division of sector. 
THE NATIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL AI NETWORK CAN BE CONCEPTUALIZED THROUGH 6 
LEVELS OF PLACE:
LITHUANIA – The innermost network consists of two central hubs: Vilnius and Kaunas. Regional cities 
constitute network nodes. This layer seeks to encourage the existing AI ecosystem and promote future 
growth. This could be done by supporting new AI applications, promote existing applications, and the 
sharing of knowledge (ex: AI meetups, conferences, online portal with a list of relevant companies). 
GLOBAL LITHUANIA – The second innermost network seeks to strengthen ties with AI experts in 
Lithuania’s diaspora. Global Lithuania is drawn out as a separate layer to highlight Lithuania’s relatively 
unique diaspora positioning (especially considering its history, size and activism in Lithuania). This layer 
seeks to identify AI experts in the diaspora, to create and maintain a registrar of diaspora AI expert’s 
contacts, and to facilitate the transfer of knowledge and competence. This transfer of knowledge and 
competence can occur indirectly (ex: highlighting success stories to build trust, attract new investors) 
and directly (ex: inviting individuals to participate as advisors on AI related committees). 
11LITHUANIAN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE STRATEGY
BALTIC REGION – The third innermost network aims to develop and maintain relationships with 
Lithuania’s neighbors: Latvia and Estonia. This layer highlights the countries’ shared modern history 
and geopolitical situation. The network could be strengthened through pan-Baltic initiatives. Such 
initiatives could also help promote the region’s shared values on a global stage. 
NORDIC-BALTIC REGION – The first outermost network positions Lithuania with its extended 
neighbors. This network can similarly be strengthened through more shared initiatives and transfer of 
knowledge. 
EUROPEAN UNION – The second outermost network identifies Lithuania within the European Union 
framework and legislation. 
GLOBAL – The third outermost network frames Lithuania within a global context. Lithuania seeks 
to take an active role in the global artificial intelligence community. This could include organizing an 
international AI conference, encouraging international companies to open initiatives (such as labs) in 
Lithuania, encouraging local AI experts to participate in international AI conferences, and so forth.
THE NATIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL AI NETWORK CAN BE CONCEPTUALIZED THROUGH 5 
SECTORS:
• Academia
• Public sector
• Private sector
• NGO 
• Independent AI enthusiasts
[3] INTEGRATION OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 
SYSTEMS ACROSS ALL ECONOMIC SECTORS.
A simulation done by McKinsey Global Institute showed that AI has the potential to deliver a global 
economic impact of an estimated $13 trillion by 2030. The adoption of AI systems can be broken down 
further into sections for the private and public sector. 
PRIVATE SECTOR 
The private sector has long been the leader in the adoption of innovative technologies. The benefits 
of AI for business are apparent: greater work productivity, optimization of logistics, automation of 
routine processes, faster business decisions and more accurate consumer market prediction. By 2020 
businesses that currently use or are planning to use AI systems anticipate a 39% increase in revenue, 
on average.  This metric alone is ensures that a large percentage of businesses, both small and large, 
will attempt to integrate AI systems into their operational structure in part or fully.  
The implementation of AI systems in businesses can present unique challenges. There is a chance of 
high entry costs, especially for businesses that do not have the significant digital infrastructure needed 
as foundation for AI integration. Despite this, businesses that build toward integrating AI systems as 
12 LITHUANIAN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE STRATEGY
An area that is often slow to technological 
advancement, agriculture plays a vital role in the 
Lithuanian economy. There are many examples of 
AI being used successfully in agriculture including: 
robotic automation of crop harvesting, intelligent 
analysis of soil conditions and prediction of 
weather patterns and crop sustainability. Sector 
leaders in agriculture need to be made aware of 
the potential of AI so they can learn how it can 
benefit their operation and apply accordingly. 
The recent adoption of a national Electronic 
Health Record system has helped modernize 
the healthcare system in Lithuania. An aging 
population ensures care providers have a growing 
number of patients assigned to them, causing an 
early as possible have a unique advantage to late comers: a greater assurance that future value will 
outweigh initial cost. This is due to the fact that front-runners in adoption of technological innovation 
have historically benefited more than those who adopt later. 
PUBLIC SECTOR
Artificial intelligence systems promise a unique set of advantages for the public sector. Creative use of 
AI can lift a country’s citizen’s well being. Some examples of public oriented projects include:
1. Crime prediction: AI models can be used to discover high risk areas for crime in cities so 
law enforcement is better adept at servicing the population.
2. Better services for citizens: Intelligent virtual assistants can better serve citizens.
3. AI for public institutions: Internal government workflow can be optimized using intelligent 
systems. 
The biggest obstacles to greater implementation of AI systems in the public sectors are the barriers 
to innovation. Public institutions are slower to adopt new technologies due to either a lack of proper 
funding or a slow bureaucratic procedures. In order to ensure the best quality of life for citizens in the 
digital age, the public sector will need to adopt a culture of innovation, especially in regard to AI.
LITHUANIA ECONOMIC BREAKDOWN 
In regard to artificial intelligence, Lithuania has a unique position in the global economy. According 
the McKinsey report, Lithuania falls within the “economies with moderate foundations” country group.
This means that even though the country has a weaker starting position than countries in the higher 
ranked groups, the potential for AI to have economic impact is there. Therefore, in order to take 
full advantage of the opportunities presented by artificial intelligence, Lithuania must work off of its 
current foundation and strive to be a future leader.
AI growth in Lithuania should be targeted in the 
key sectors that need it the most. These sectors 
are identified based off of two factors: importance 
to the Lithuanian economy and potential for AI to 
have a significant impact in the sector. 
Manufacturing is the largest sector of the 
Lithuanian economy, generating 20,4% of the 
country’s GDP. The biggest challenges faced by 
the Lithuanian manufacturing sector are the low 
levels of labor productivity. Artificial intelligence 
systems can mitigate these challenges by 
automating routine tasks. Together with intelligent 
robotics systems, the manufacturing sector looks 
to reap some of the biggest benefits from AI. 
Incentivizing the integration of AI systems now will 
help the Lithuanian manufacturing sector remain 
competitive in the regional and global markets. 
MANUFACTURING: 
AGRICULTURE: 
HEALTHCARE: 
13LITHUANIAN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE STRATEGY
increase in the amount of paperwork they need to 
do and a decrease in the amount of time they can 
spend with their patient. AI systems can be used 
to optimize visits and shorten the time needed to 
spend on documentation, allowing providers to 
have more face-to-face time with their patients. 
Both the adoption of currently available AI systems 
into healthcare processes and the creation of 
new ones should be promoted if Lithuania seeks 
to improve the wellbeing of its citizens.
Transportation, especially logistics, is vital to 
the interworking of the Lithuanian economy. AI 
systems can automate traffic control and reduce 
travel times. The widespread use of autonomous 
vehicles has the potential to significantly alter 
the logistical dynamics in the country. Lithuania 
should look to be an early adopter of this by 
participating in EU initiatives like the 5G cross-
border corridors for testing automated mobility. 
This will allow the nation to build experience 
in autonomous vehicles and prepare for risk 
mitigation and future policy changes. 
The energy sector should utilize AI systems to 
create more efficient methods for delivering 
power. With a more efficient approach to power 
distribution, Lithuania can increase sustainability 
and become less dependent on foreign sources 
of energy.  
TRANSPORTATION: 
ENERGY: 
POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS:
PRINCIPLE 1     TO INCREASE THE USE OF AI SYSTEMS IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR.
Mechanism: Analyze the potential for AI research and development in one of the 
existing Digital Innovation Hubs in Lithuania. 
Mechanism: Incentivize companies that are forerunners of their sectors for AI 
implementation. Companies can be granted an AI Badge that will publically position 
them as leaders in the field. 
Mechanism: Establish a platform where industry leaders can communicate innovative 
uses of AI systems in their business. 
Mechanism: Encourage AI startups by creating a Lithuanian AI startup hub.
PRINCIPLE 2     TO INCREASE THE USE OF AI SYSTEMS IN THE PUBLIC SECTOR.
Mechanism: Create a culture of innovation in the public sector that promotes AI 
solutions to be developed and tested. 
Mechanism: Create a regulatory sandbox that will allow the use and testing of AI 
systems in the public sector for a limited time frame. This will allow the developers to 
test out there product in a live environment and allow the public sector to determine 
what solutions can be integrated. 
14 LITHUANIAN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE STRATEGY
Mechanism: Assist public institutions in implementing AI systems that help benefit 
citizens and improve workflow.
Mechanism: Establish a Lithuanian Artificial Intelligence Advisory Board that will assist 
government in decisions on future AI policy. The board can be split into national and 
international levels. 
Mechanism: Create public-partnerships that create better conditions for development 
of AI systems. 
PRINCIPLE 3   TO TARGET KEY ECONOMIC SECTORS THAT WILL BENEFIT THE MOST 
FROM ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE SYSTEMS ADOPTION. 
Mechanism: Develop individual approaches for AI innovation in the Manufacturing, 
Agriculture, Healthcare, Transportation, and Energy sectors.
Mechanism: Research into other sectors of industry in which the adoption of AI systems 
can create the most benefit. 
[4] NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT OF SKILLS AND 
COMPETENCIES NEEDED FOR A FUTURE WITH 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
In an era where the requirements to enter the job market are constantly shifting, a greater aptitude 
for continuous learning is needed. Widespread application of AI systems presents a serious dilemma 
for the labor force: the robotization and automation of work tasks traditionally considered to require 
human input. As AI becomes more developed, cheaper to produce and easier to implement, more 
companies will have to integrate AI systems in order to remain competitive. This will undoubtedly lead 
to a shift in the job market and a decrease in the availability of routine non-creative job tasks. Some 
job markets are at greater risk than others, especially service, sales and construction. According to the 
Automation, skills use and training report done by OECD, in Lithuania the work tasks of the median 
laborer have a 57% chance of being automated. This positions Lithuania as the second most country 
with the highest chance of job automation, behind only the Slovak Republic. To prepare citizens, a 
three-point approach should be implemented to target technical skill development in school children, 
students in higher education and those currently employed. 
The adaptation to the shift in labor markets should start with reevaluating the curriculum currently 
being taught at schools. A greater emphasis needs to be placed on teaching the technical skills needed 
for a future where most work is augmented with AI. This is especially true for Lithuania’s regional 
districts, which need greater educational support than city centers in regard to new technologies. 
These are also the areas where the labor market is composed of jobs that are most susceptible to 
automation as the majority of the regional economy is based on manufacturing.  The exploration of 
15LITHUANIAN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE STRATEGY
STEM fields should be encouraged for students to develop a positive relationship with technology.
The second point to target is higher education. Rather than replacing the current academic structure, 
more emphasis should be made on supplemental course work that teaches AI and technologies for 
students in programs that do not traditionally require it. Studies in fields that have a high risk of 
automation and change should have classes that teach the fundamental skills needed to adapt their 
workflow to meet the demands of AI.  
The current labor force also needs to have the tools needed to succeed in a future with AI. Opportunities 
for vocational training need to be created, prioritizing those with jobs and occupations that have the 
greatest risk of automation. The focus should be on how to augment and optimize current work 
with AI, rather than re-training for a different occupation. This will allow the current labor force to 
remain relevant, as the new generation prepares for work with AI. Leadership should communicate 
the positives of AI and the potential for increase of productivity and time for tasks that require critical 
thinking, rather than the possibility of job loss. 
POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS:
PRINCIPLE 1  TO DEVELOP THE SKILLS NEEDED FOR A FUTURE WITH AI FROM THE 
BEGINNING OF EDUCATION.
Mechanism: A public-private partnership where school children are taken to businesses 
that are creating innovative AI products to be shown the new technologies being worked 
on. 
Mechanism: Create classwork for children that will have AI basics as a learning objective.  
Mechanism: Focus on a development of technical skills for school children in Lithuania’s 
regional districts. 
Mechanism: Modernize the teaching of STEM subjects, especially mathematics. 
Mechanism: Train a new generation of teachers to both have high technical competencies 
themselves and the ability to instruct students on how to use new technologies. 
PRINCIPLE 2     TO PROVIDE STUDENTS IN HIGHER EDUCATION LEARNING 
OPPORTUNITIES FOR AI. 
Mechanism: A semester course in university that teaches AI basics and how they can 
be applied in students chosen field of study.
Mechanism: Identification of areas of study that lead to jobs with high risk of automation. 
Creation of supplemental coursework for these areas that teaches positive ways their 
work can be augmented with AI.
16 LITHUANIAN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE STRATEGY
PRINCIPLE 3     TO ENSURE THE CURRENT LABOR FORCE HAS THE COMPETENCIES 
NEEDED FOR A SHIFTING JOB MARKET. 
Mechanism: Creation of vocational training programs in artificial intelligence and other 
emerging technologies. Prioritization should be on developing programs for occupations 
with the highest number of employees at risk of having job tasks automated. 
Mechanism: Creation of a massively accessible online training program in artificial 
intelligence that will teach citizens the basics of AI, as well as communicate the impact 
that it will have on the future.
[5] GROWTH OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE RESEARCH 
AND DEVELOPMENT
Sustainable growth of artificial intelligence systems requires an infrastructure of related research and 
development (R&D). In recent years, countries that have invested the most in AI R&D have emerged as 
global leaders. High levels of R&D growth can be accomplished in two distinct ways: significant private 
investment into AI R&D in countries that have large technology companies, such as the United States, 
or direct government investment, in the case of China and the European Union. In the EU, France has 
committed a EUR 1.5 billion plan to stimulate the AI ecosystem, with the bulk of the investment going 
to AI research. However, this is dwarfed by the Chinese government’s New Generation of Artificial 
Intelligence Development plan that looks to invest US$150 billion in the next few years. Smaller states 
do not have the resources to match this level of investment, which is why it is important for them to 
tailor individual strategies that are more focused and work for them.
Research and development needs to be targeted toward artificial intelligence on a national level, 
if Lithuania seeks to be a leader in AI. A well-outlined and structured program will help to draw 
international talent, as well as help retain Lithuania’s research leaders in AI. Since 2016, the Lithuanian 
government financed EUR 12.5 million worth of projects in artificial intelligence systems, which were 
for private sector organizations creating innovative solutions. In addition, academic research projects 
in artificial intelligence received EUR 6.5 million. While investment is significant, it is unstructured and 
relies on existing initiatives for innovation financing. If Lithuania seeks to remain competitive in the 
global market for AI research, the government a strategically organized plan for financing AI R&D that 
is both direct in approach and encompassing in scope.  
Currently, all research done in Lithuania is linked together in the Lithuanian Roadmap for Research 
Infrastructures. The roadmap highlights research infrastructure in the areas of Social Sciences and 
Humanities, Biomedical Sciences, Environment Sciences, Energy, Materials and Analysis Centers, 
Physical and Technology Sciences and E-Infrastructures. While Lithuania has research centers 
for technically relevant areas like chemistry (Centre of Innovative Chemistry [INOCHEMAS]), high-
performance computing (Lithuanian Grid Infrastructure for High-Performance Computing [LitGrid-
HPC]) and mechatronics (Research Infrastructure of Mechatronics [Mechatronika]), there is no center 
17LITHUANIAN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE STRATEGY
that focuses primarily on AI. Other countries, such as Czech Republic, Demark, France, Germany, 
Ireland, Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom have dedicated AI research centers 
working with the latest technologies. In order to remain relevant in the global AI community, Lithuania 
must consider the possibility of financing a center or hub for AI research.   
POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS:
PRINCIPLE 1    TO CREATE A LEVEL OF EXCELLENCE IN RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
FOR ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE SYSTEMS.
Mechanism: Create a dedicated artificial intelligence research-funding program that 
focuses on the key elements outlined in this report. 
Mechanism: Meet the standards set out by the European Commission of increasing 
funding into AI research and development projects by 70% by the end of 2020.
Mechanism: Establish a national AI research center.
Mechanism: Analyze the ability for one of Lithuania’s Digital Innovation Hubs (DIH) to 
be a leader in research of innovative AI systems. 
Mechanism: Integrate AI research and development funding into the Smart Specialization 
2020 Investment Plan. 
PRINCIPLE 2     TO CREATE A HIGH-LEVEL EDUCATIONAL ENVIRONMENT THAT WILL 
ENCOURAGE CONTINUED RESEARCH IN AI. 
Mechanism: Create an AI Fast Track online portal for prospective students that will list 
all of the university programs that focus on AI.
Mechanism: Plan the first ever Lithuanian masters program that will focus on AI systems 
as the main topic of study.
Mechanism: Fund academic PhD research in artificial intelligence systems. 
Mechanism: Increase funding for university hardware required for artificial intelligence 
research. Work with universities to present a cost-benefit analysis of funding the 
purchase of hardware in a physical space, or using cloud-based services. 
Mechanism: Refocus current IT programs in Lithuania’s universities. Modernize the 
qualifications needed to pursue an academic career in IT related subjects. 
Mechanism: Promote joint research in AI between private organizations and public 
educational institutions. 
 [6] A RESPONSIBLE AND EFFICIENT APPROACH TO 
DATA
18 LITHUANIAN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE STRATEGY
Greater accessibility to data is one of the key driving factors of the artificial intelligence expansion 
in recent years. AI methodologies like deep learning, natural language processing and data mining 
require large data sets in order to develop working products. The bigger and more complete the data 
set upon which an AI system is being tested, the more reliable the final product. Data serves as the 
foundation upon which artificial intelligence systems can be built.
AI requires that data is not only accessible, but also of high quality. The higher the quality of the data 
set, the more precise the AI system will be. Unfortunately, it is often the case, that public data that is 
collected by different administrations is fragmented with limited accessibility. While the private sector 
has the ability to set their own individual standards based on business needs, the public sector will 
need to adopt a unified approach to data management that is favorable for use in AI systems. This 
can be accomplished by introducing the data maturity model to the public sector and ensuring that all 
institutions strive to better their data management.
The Lithuanian government has initiatives aimed at creating an open data ecosystem in the public 
sector. An online portal Opendata.gov.lt exists where users may upload data; however, the lack of 
data literacy limits usability. 91% of data is uploaded in a closed format, and up to 64% data sets 
uploaded are single purpose and not regularly updated. Furthermore, the portal does not guarantee 
that any data will be uploaded, as it is up to administration at public organizations to determine when 
and what data will be uploaded. Some public institutions have their own separate open data portals, 
which creates a disconnect and a lack of centralization. This makes it difficult to monitor if data is being 
provided correctly, as well as complicating the process for accessing the data. A centralized hub for 
data administration in the public sector would unify Lithuania’s approach to data and promote more 
involvement from the public sector in the open data ecosystem. The hub will create standards for data 
literacy that will ensure data is managed correctly.
POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS:
1 PRINCIPLE    TO CREATE A STABLE AND AI-FRIENDLY DATA ENVIRONMENT, WITH 
FOCUS ON THE PUBLIC SECTOR.
Mechanism: Sandbox environments that will open up public sector data for the 
development of artificial intelligence tools. The purpose of the sandbox is to provide 
individuals and organizations that are seeking to develop AI systems access to public 
data. 
Mechanism: Establish funding for a public sector data team that will oversee the open 
data initiatives. The data team will have certain key tasks including:
• Enforcing standards of data management.
• Creating an environment for AI systems development. 
• Educating institutions with a focus on data literacy.
19LITHUANIAN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE STRATEGY
Mechanism: Data scientists and experts need to work together with Lithuania’s current 
data team in order to create a model for data management. The model will serve as a 
basis for revisions to current data infrastructure and future updates. 
2 PRINCIPLE     TO ENSURE THAT LITHUANIA’S DATA MEETS INTERNATIONAL 
STANDARD REQUIREMENTS. 
Mechanism: Ensure research data used for AI systems meets the requirements of 
the European Union’s FAIR Data Management in Horizon 2020 project. This will enable 
research data to be “findable, accessible, interoperable and reusable (FAIR)”. 
Mechanism: Ensure that private and public entities using data for AI development 
purposes comply with the European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR).
20 LITHUANIAN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE STRATEGY
Elijus Čivilis – Viceministras - Ekonomikos ir Inovacijų Ministerija
Gintaras Vilda - Viceministras - Ekonomikos ir Inovacijų Ministerija
Vaidas Gricius - Departamento direktorius - Ekonomikos ir Inovacijų Ministerija
Paulius Vertelka – Direktorius - INFOBALT
Darius Amilevičius, dr. - Intelektualių sistemų laboratorijos vadovas – Vytauto Didžiojo 
Universitetas, Informatikos fakultetas
Gediminas Peksys – CEO - Oxipit Lt, UAB
Tomas Dirvonskas – CEO – Lemon Labs Lt, UAB
Tomas Krilavičius - Informatikos fakulteto profesorius - Vytauto Didžiojo Universitetas
Audrius Zujus – CTO - BPTI
Tomas Zalandauskas – CEO - BPTI
Mindaugas Eglinskas – CEO - Pixevia Lt, UAB
Vilius Kontrimas – Directorius - Advantes Technologies Lt, UAB
Giedrius Karauskas - Verslo vystymo vadovas – Tilde informacinės technologijos, UAB
Aleksas Pielikis - Programinės įrangos inžinierius - Neurotechnology Lt, UAB
Renaldas Zioma - Programinės įrangos inžinierius  - Unity Lt, UAB
Saulė Petraitytė - Kurk Lietuvai
Markas Mongirdas – Kurk Lietuvai
Aistė Zalepugaitė – Kurk Lietuvai
Arūnė Matelytė – Kurk Lietuvai
AI THINK TANK CONTRIBUTORS
