Strategic Action Plan for 
Artificial Intelligence
The Netherlands

Strategic Action Plan for 
Artificial Intelligence
The Netherlands

Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence | 5
Table of contents
Summary 7
Artificial intelligence is the key technology for societal and economic opportunities  9
Track 1: Capitalising on societal and economic opportunities  13
AI offers solutions for societal challenges  15
The government makes optimal use of AI in the performance of public tasks 19
AI entrepreneurship is stimulated 22
Track 2: Creating the right conditions 25
AI research and innovation in the Netherlands are of high quality and leading in Europe 27
The Netherlands has excellent training opportunities for living with AI and more talent  
for working with AI 30
The Netherlands has more usable data for AI applications to improve AI developments  34
The Netherlands is at the forefront of Europe in high-quality digital and intelligent connectivity 
 for effective AI applications 37
Track 3: Strengthening the foundations 39
Public values and human rights remain protected 41
AI is used in such a way that everyone can trust it 43
Markets are open, competitive and offer good consumer protection  47
The safety of citizens, businesses and government entities in the Netherlands remains protected  50
Appendices 53
Appendix 1: Overview of actions  54
Appendix 2: Financial resources for AI  61
AI oers solutions for societal challenges
The government makes optimal use of AI in the performance of 
public tasks
Public values and human rights remain protected
The safety of citizens, businesses and government entities in
the Netherlands remains protected at all times
AI is applied in such a way that everyone can trust it
Markets are open and competitive, and oer good 
consumer protection
AI research and innovation in the Netherlands are of high quality
and are leading in Europe
The Netherlands is at the forefront of Europe in high-quality digital
and intelligent connectivity for eective AI applications
The Netherlands has excellent training opportunities for living 
with AI and more talent for working with AI
The Netherlands has more usable data for AI applications to 
improve AI developments
Strategic Action Plan for Arti cial Intelligence 
Track 2
Track 3
Strengthening the 
foundations
Creating the 
right conditions
Track 1
Capitalising on societal and 
economic opportunities
The Netherlands is able to capitalise on AI’s societal and economic opportunities, as well as to safeguard the public interests of AI, thus 
contributing to prosperity and well-being
AI entrepreneurship is stimulated
Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence | 7
Summary
Artificial intelligence (AI) is radically changing the world.  
AI will make a substantial contribution to economic growth, 
prosperity and well-being of the Netherlands. It will also 
be of huge assistance in dealing with societal issues in 
areas such as ageing, climate change, food safety and 
healthcare. At the same time, we must not close our eyes 
to challenges such as the protection of fundamental rights 
including privacy, non-discrimination and autonomy. 
If the Netherlands and Europe wish to be at the forefront 
of a globally competitive economy, we must accelerate the 
development and application of AI in the Netherlands.  
We can do so. The Netherlands is well positioned to take 
on this challenge, partly due to its high-quality connecti-
vity, strong foundation for public-private partnerships 
(PPP) and world-class research. We must make good use 
of this head start to develop our international profile in 
this area.
The government is focusing on three tracks. Track 1 is that 
we must capitalise on societal and economic opportunities 
This goal requires intensive PPPs, which will enable the 
Netherlands to make a difference on the European playing 
field and in global markets. From start-ups and scale-ups 
to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) or large 
corporations, companies are crucial due to their innovative 
and competitive power. They will determine whether the 
Netherlands leads the way in AI or ends up following other 
countries in this area, and whether AI applications will 
really benefit the Dutch economy and Dutch society. 
Companies’ added value comes from their ability to 
respond both to societal challenges and market demand. 
As a result, the government is developing this track in 
PPPs, particularly with the Dutch AI Coalition, while calling 
on companies and organisations to join in these efforts. 
Track 2 intends to arrange the required prerequisites for a 
favourable AI climate in the economy and society at large. 
These prerequisites include the right knowledge, skills and 
training: top-quality scientific AI research as well as 
applied research that businesses and professionals can 
use. They also include usable data and high-quality and 
intelligent connectivity. In this context, we are investing in 
research programmes, increasing access to innovation 
funding for start-ups, investing in training, promoting 
data-sharing, and further developing digital connectivity 
with and for AI. 
Track 3 is about ‘Strengthening the foundations’. This track 
concerns the protection of citizens fundamental rights as 
well as appropriate legal and ethical frameworks. As a 
result, people and companies will feel confident that AI 
will be used with care. It is important as well that markets 
remain open and competitive, and that national security is 
safeguarded in all AI developments. To this end, the 
necessary legislation and regulations are already in force 
or in the making. The government is also monitoring AI 
developments and making efforts to ensure the use of 
ethical guidelines (European and otherwise) for AI 
applications by companies and public organisations. 
In other words, there is no time to waste. This Strategic 
Action Plan for AI describes the course that the Netherlands 
wants to take. It is a first step towards initiating concrete 
measures to achieve the intended acceleration and profile. 
The government cooperates with the Dutch AI Coalition,  
in which companies, government agencies, knowledge 
institutions and educational institutions join forces to 
implement new AI actions that help specific domains and 
sectors.
The following principles play a guiding role in the Dutch 
approach:
 • We work together in public-private partnerships, 
including in the Dutch AI Coalition, to seize the societal 
and economic opportunities of AI.
 • The Netherlands is committed to international coopera-
tion, especially with European partners. 
 • We promote ourselves as a country that is at the 
forefront of AI applications which serve the interests of 
people and society. 
 • We opt for an inclusive approach that puts people first, 
in which we strive for reliable AI.
The Dutch AI approach has the following main objective: 
The Netherlands is able to capitalise on AI’s societal and 
economic opportunities, as well as to safeguard the public 
interests of AI, thus contributing to prosperity and 
well-being. This objective is elaborated in three tracks, 
comprising a total of eleven objectives, as indicated in the 
following infographic.

Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence | 9
Artificial intelligence is the key technology for 
societal and economic opportunities 
AI1 is a key technology that is transforming our world. 
Image recognition applications support physicians in the 
diagnosis of certain types of cancer. AI is also increasingly 
being used in the logistics sector and plays a major role in 
the development of self-driving cars. We also experience 
the convenience offered by AI in our daily lives, for 
example in the form of intelligent search engines, 
translation algorithms, navigation systems, webshop 
chatbots that automatically respond to questions and 
complaints, and algorithms that make recommendations 
to us or even develop tailor-made products that meet our 
personal needs. AI can also be combined with robotics or 
unmanned systems, for example in the manufacturing 
industry. 
 
AI owes its huge societal and economic potential to the 
fact that this key technology can be applied in almost all 
domains and sectors. Eighty-six per cent of companies 
anticipate that AI will have a major impact on their sector.2 
AI also has an impact on public interests and values such 
as fundamental rights, consumer protection and national 
security. Given AI’s high speed of development, it is 
important to continue monitoring this impact, and to track 
and anticipate its effect on our public interests. Space for 
experimenting with AI applications is important in this 
respect.
1 For more information on the definition of AI, see the Independent 
High-Level Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence, ‘A Definition of AI: 
Main Capabilities and Scientific Disciplines’, April 2019.
2 EY and Microsoft, ‘Artificial Intelligence in the Netherlands’,  
October 2018.
WHAT IS AI?
There is no generally valid definition of AI that is 
consistently used by all stakeholders. We use the 
European Commission’s description of AI: ‘AI refers to 
systems that display intelligent behaviour by 
analysing their environment and taking actions – with 
some degree of autonomy – to achieve specific goals’.
For an understandable explanation of what AI is, 
everyone is invited to take the National AI course 
<https://app.ai-cursus.nl/home>. This course briefly 
explains what this technology is all about. 
Participation is free.
Well placed
The Netherlands is well placed to take advantage of the 
opportunities offered by digitalisation in general and by AI 
in particular.3 We have world-class networks, data centres 
and hosting and housing providers, a digitally active and 
skilled population, a research community that is doing 
groundbreaking research on AI while applying it itself,4 and 
a favourable, PPP-intensive climate for entrepreneurs, 
start-ups and innovation. The Dutch government 
distinguishes itself by its many (often small-scale) pilots 
and experiments and an increasing focus on the develop-
ment and promotion of key enabling technologies. 
According to research by McKinsey, the Netherlands scores 
above average in terms of AI readiness on all the different 
dimensions, with top scores for automation, digital 
readiness and innovation.5
3 Parliamentary Paper 26643, No. 623. For a detailed description of the 
current state of affairs, see ‘Rapport AI voor Nederland’ (Report on 
AI for the Netherlands) of the Confederation of Netherlands Industry 
and Employers (VNO-NCW), et al., November 2018. 
4 Elsevier, ‘Artificial Intelligence: How knowledge is created, 
transferred and used’, 2018. One of the findings is that of the more 
than 100 Dutch AI scientists, approximately forty have an above-
average citation index.
5 McKinsey Global Institute, ‘Notes from the AI Frontier; Tackling 
Europe’s Gap in Digital and AI’, February 2019, p. 42.
10 | Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence
Urgency to accelerate 
The Netherlands will need to accelerate in the area of AI, 
as it is crucial for the efficiency and effectiveness of all 
sectors and domains. Other countries are also investing 
heavily in AI, for good reason. The Netherlands must 
facilitate AI, so that companies can keep their research  
and innovation in (and bring it to) the Netherlands.6 
Companies will have to apply high-quality AI in order to 
remain competitive. After all, a ‘winner-takes-all’ or 
‘winner-takes-most’ dynamic can arise, with a real chance 
that the Netherlands will become dependent on other 
parties.7 That could potentially damage our economic 
security, our autonomy and our well-being. And while the 
Netherlands is well placed for AI in certain respects, in 
other areas it needs to tighten its approach. Large 
companies are already using AI to provide better services 
and increase productivity. It is important that SMEs follow 
suit and that the number of start-ups and scale-ups8 in the 
area of AI increases considerably.9 The Netherlands must 
take action to position itself firmly in the AI playing field 
and create a thriving AI ecosystem.10
The Dutch approach: a strategic action plan 
for AI 
This Strategic Action Plan for AI (SAPAI) contains the 
government’s intentions to accelerate AI development in 
the Netherlands and to raise its profile internationally.  
It examines AI developments in the Netherlands, the 
elements needed to further encourage AI innovation, and 
the fundamentals that are crucial to safeguarding public 
interests in AI developments. With this plan, the 
Netherlands aims to capitalise on AI’s societal and 
economic opportunities in the long term and to safeguard 
the public interests surrounding AI. Many countries have 
already drawn up an AI strategy, and the European 
Commission has published a coordinated plan for AI in 
which it calls on Member States to create their own AI 
plans. 
6 ‘Rapport AI voor Nederland’ (Report on AI for the Netherlands), 
Confederation of Netherlands Industry and Employers (VNO-NCW), 
et al., November 2018. 
7 Ibid.
8 Start-ups and scale-ups are young, technology-driven companies 
with the ambition to grow into international innovative leaders.
9 Ibid.
10 Ibid. 
This Strategic Action Plan for AI responds to that call.  
It was created in collaboration with public and private 
parties (the AI Task Force) and is in line with the 2018 
Dutch Digitalisation Strategy11 and other relevant policy 
documents. The Report on AI for the Netherlands and the 
recent white paper of the AI Task Force are important 
building blocks for this Action Plan. It sets out an inte-
grated approach and general policies. Sectors or domains 
are included mainly for illustrative purposes. The exception 
to this is Track 1, where a non-exhaustive series of specific 
actions has been identified for a number of domains. 
Governance
The Strategic Action Plan for AI is an agenda that is 
updated annually. The House of Representatives will be 
informed about the implementation of the policy actions 
set out in this Action Plan (see Appendix 1 for an overview) 
as part of the progress report and update of the Dutch 
Digitalisation Strategy. In addition, the various ministries 
apply their own evaluation and monitoring systems for the 
actions for which they are responsible. The progress of the 
AI approach is on the agenda of the National Council for 
the Dutch Digitalisation Strategy.
The government collaborates with the Dutch AI Coalition 
in specific areas. In this Coalition, companies, government 
agencies, knowledge institutions and educational 
institutions work together on generic issues in order to 
help specific application areas and sectors move forward. 
Examples include collaboration in the field of talent and 
knowledge development, access to knowledge, data 
sharing, societal acceptance of AI, promotion of new 
economic activity and a stimulating role towards applica-
tion areas/sectors.
11 Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy, ‘Dutch Digitalisation 
Strategy: Getting the Netherlands ready for the digital future.’ June 
2018.


Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence | 13
Track 1: Capitalising on societal and 
economic opportunities 
AI offers great societal and economic opportunities. First of all, there are opportunities for solving societal challenges in 
which the government is involved as a partner. Consider, for example, the use of AI for more effective investigation and 
enforcement, new possibilities for prevention, diagnosis and treatment in healthcare, cultivation of crops without 
daylight, and predicting traffic jams. AI also has considerable potential in the provision of public services and can help 
improve work processes of government organisations. The government is also encouraging the business community to 
develop AI applications and utilise knowledge.
Solving societal 
challenges
Government’s use of AI for 
public tasks
Cooperation on societal 
challenges
Organisational integration
Beer cooperation
The government experiments
Government encourages 
companies to perform public tasks
Government stimulates start-ups
Companies use knowledge
Encouraging AI 
Entrepreneurship
Actions include:
• Knowledge and Innovation Agendas 
2020–2023 for missions and key technolo-
gies, including AI. 
• Research into design principles for AI in the 
legal domain (CWI, the national research 
institute for mathematics and computer 
science,  TNO the Netherlands organisation 
for applied scientic research, the UvA, 
University of Amsterdam and the OM, the 
Dutch public prosecution service). 
Actions include:
•  The digital course series on AI by the 
Academy for Digitalisation and Computerisa-
tion of the Government, is available for every 
civil servant in the Netherlands.
Actions include:
• Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom 
Relations (BZK), Association of Netherlands 
Municipalities (VNG) and Netherlands 
Enterprise Agency (RVO) organise round 
tables on the public domain and the technolo-
gies applied there, such as chatbots.
• The government organises expert meetings 
on AI for various professional disciplines 
(technical and otherwise), such as architects, 
developers and data scientists.
Actions include:
•Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom 
Relations (BZK), Association of Netherlands 
Municipalities (VNG) and others experiment 
with AI, with a focus on ethics by design and 
algorithm transparency.
• Government agencies such as the police, the 
Netherlands Enterprise Agency and P-Direkt 
(the Shared Service Centre for HRM of the 
Dutch government) develop a chatbot.
Actions include:
• Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom 
Relations (BZK), together with a regional 
party, publishes a second AI SBIRtender.
• Ministries participate in the largest AI and 
blockchain hackathon in the world: Odyssey.
Actions include:
• Improved access to innovation funding and 
venture capital through Innovation Credits, 
the Seed Capital Scheme and the Dutch 
Venture Initiative.
• Stationing start-up Liaison Ocers in San 
Francisco/Los Angeles, New York/Boston, 
Singapore, Berlin, Paris and London.
Actions include:
•Plan of the Netherlands AI Coalition  to 
enhance synergies between research, 
education and organisations.
• Regional smart industry hubs and data 
value hubs provide SMEs with tools and 
training modules for responsible use of AI.
• Chambers of Commerce oer hands-on AI 
information to SMEs..
Track 1 | Capitalising on societal and economic opportunities 
Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence | 15
AI offers solutions for societal challenges 
AI can contribute to solving societal challenges in all sorts 
of areas such as safety, healthcare, agriculture and food, 
energy transition and sustainability. In order to seize these 
opportunities, the government is also focusing on an 
aspect that distinguishes the Netherlands from other 
countries: its excellent PPP environment, As a result the 
Netherlands has an attractive climate for larger pilot areas 
and hubs for data sharing and sectoral applications that 
are being set up at a European level. The Dutch AI 
Coalition is collaborating with stakeholders (including the 
government) on a domain-specific implementation. 
The Netherlands organises public–
private partnerships to work on 
societal challenges
In order to capitalise on the opportunities offered by AI for 
solving societal issues, the government has opted for the 
Dutch approach: organising good cooperation between 
government agencies, companies and knowledge 
institutions, with shared responsibilities. It is up to the 
government to create the right conditions, to promote 
innovation and to apply AI in its own domain and for 
achieving its own goals. The government is therefore 
committed to exploiting the societal and economic 
opportunities of AI in areas and sectors such as safety, 
healthcare, agriculture and food, the energy transition and 
sustainability, for example in the context of the mission-
driven innovation policy. In addition, the government itself 
uses AI in the provision of public services. But it is 
ultimately the companies (from start-ups and scale-ups to 
SMEs and large companies), with their innovative and 
competitive strengths, that make the difference. They 
determine whether the Netherlands will lead or follow in 
AI and, especially, in its application in a way that offers 
economic and societal value. Companies generate such 
added value by responding to the aforementioned societal 
challenges, and to market demand. The government is 
further developing this track in PPPs, in particular with the 
Dutch AI Coalition, and calls on companies and organisa-
tions to join this effort in order to jointly turn the chal-
lenges and opportunities surrounding AI into effective 
action. 
The Dutch AI Coalition and the Dutch Digital Delta  
‘Top Team’, together with companies, ministries, 
knowledge institutes, ‘Top Sectors’, the Netherlands 
Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO), the 
Association of Universities in the Netherlands (VSNU) and 
the Netherlands Organisation for Applied Scientific 
Research (TNO), are developing long-term knowledge and 
innovation programmes for generic basic knowledge in 
combination with knowledge and cooperation in sectors 
such as healthcare, agriculture and food. 
In its letter to the House of Representatives entitled Naar 
missiegedreven Innovatiebeleid met Impact (Towards mission-
driven innovation policy with impact), the government 
broadly formulated a new approach for the Top Sectors 
and innovation policy. Here, too, the emphasis is on PPP in 
order to seize the opportunities it offers for tackling 
societal challenges. 
  ACTIONS:
• In October/November 2019, the Knowledge and 
Innovation Agendas 2020-2023 will be published 
for missions and key enabling technologies, 
including AI. These missions are in the areas of 
safety, healthcare, agriculture and food, the energy 
transition and sustainability. The agendas contain a 
long-term financial commitment in the form of a 
Knowledge and Innovation Contract.
• Together with other parties, TNO is investing in 
in-depth knowledge, system development and the 
development of ecosystems and applications for AI, 
for example for cybersecurity, care, agriculture and 
security. The approach is multidisciplinary, 
combining knowledge about technology, behaviour, 
acceptance and applications. 
Security
AI technology offers many opportunities in the fields of 
justice, security and defence. Security is not only a societal 
challenge, but also a public task. 
Research is currently being carried out, often in collabora-
tion with scientific institutions, into the opportunities for 
the application of AI in, for example, cybersecurity, police 
tasks and defence. Ethical aspects and proportionality are 
also explicitly taken into account. 
16 | Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence
In the police domain, too, there are great opportunities for 
using AI. In fact, it is already being applied in various ways, 
for example in the selection of relevant visual material for 
investigative purposes, in the selection of promising cold 
cases, or to improve the handling of reports. In order to 
further stimulate research into, and the development of, 
AI within the organisation, the police have established the 
National Police Lab AI. This is a systematic, long-term 
collaboration between police and science in the context of 
the Innovation Centre for Artificial Intelligence (ICAI), to 
investigate how AI can contribute to the effectiveness of 
the police, today and in the future. Research is also being 
carried out into explainable and transparent AI and into 
the ethical aspects of using AI in policing. The Lab has also 
proven to be a useful tool for the police to engage and 
retain AI top talent. In this way, the police are at the 
forefront of developing the ethical, social and societal 
responsible application of AI for its tasks.
Experiments with AI applications have also been started in 
the field of justice administration and law enforcement, 
for example to gain a better understanding of debt 
problems or to better detect child abuse or molestation.  
At present, the guiding principle for the application of AI in 
the administration of justice is that experiments should 
take place in small, clear and manageable steps outside 
the context, for the time being, of actual pending lawsuits 
or disputes.12
Under the heading ‘Meaningful Control of Autonomous 
Systems’ (MCAS), the Centre for Work and Income (CWI), 
TNO, the UvA Faculty of Law and the UvA Institute of 
Informatics, together with an endowed professor of Public 
Prosecution, are developing a series of system design 
principles for a new generation of intelligent systems 
within the legal domain.
The opportunities of AI for security cannot be dissociated 
from the international context. The European 
Commission, the United Nations Interregional Crime and 
Justice Research Institute and the International Criminal 
Police Organization (INTERPOL) are currently analysing  
the opportunities offered by AI in criminal investigation 
and law enforcement. The European Commission’s 
Directorate-General for Migration and Home Affairs 
intends to draw up a strategy for AI in the security and 
migration domain. Within the Council of Europe, an 
‘Ethical Charter on the Use of Artificial Intelligence in 
Judicial Systems and their environment’ has been 
adopted.
12 See, for example, the letter from the Minister for Legal Protection to 
the Senate on artificial intelligence and algorithms in the administra-
tion of justice of 19 December 2018, Parliamentary Paper 34775-VI, 
No. AH.
On behalf of the Dutch Ministry of Defence, research has 
been carried out into AI and its implications for defence.  
In this domain, AI offers opportunities in the field of 
decision support, intelligence gathering, data analysis and 
accelerated responsiveness in the defence of Dutch 
territory. Another advantage of AI systems for the Ministry 
of Defence is the possibility of intervening in areas that are 
not accessible to people due to Anti-Access/Area Denial 
weapon systems. This application is already being 
implemented in a number of areas, such as underwater 
drones for mine control (Remus) and the missile defence 
system (the Patriot). The focus is on autonomous systems 
that can take over ‘dull, dirty & dangerous’ tasks. Ongoing 
research is focused on the further development of 
algorithms, command and control and the interaction 
between different unmanned systems. The Ministry of 
Defence is also developing a vision for AI. 
  ACTIONS:
• Research on the effectiveness of the application of 
AI for police tasks and the ethical aspects of AI.
• Research into design principles for AI in the legal 
domain (CWI; Netherlands Organisation for Applied 
Scientific Research (TNO); University of Amsterdam 
(UvA) and the Dutch Public Prosecution Service).
• The Robotic Autonomous Systems unit of the 
Ministry of Defence translates developments in the 
field of robotics and autonomous systems into 
concrete national operations. 
• The Ministry of Defence is developing a vision for AI 
in which attention will be paid to the use of AI in 
military functions (e.g. command and control, 
intelligence, protection and logistics). This vision 
will be published in 2020.
Health and healthcare 
AI offers new opportunities for healthcare in the field of 
prevention, diagnosis and treatment, and logistics. For 
example, there are AI tools in use that can accurately 
analyse cancer cells, allowing better diagnoses to be made. 
AI applications can read X-rays, enabling faster detection 
and analysis of conditions. There are algorithms that can 
predict aggression in patients or calculate the chance of 
re-admission in intensive care. AI also holds a substantial 
promise as a decision support tool (DST) for the healthcare 
professional. In addition, AI is increasingly able to support 
citizens in self-management of their health through the 
many possibilities offered by portable technology and 
health apps. The possibilities of AI within the healthcare 
sector should therefore be stimulated. At the same time, 
however, these developments pose new challenges. 
Citizens and healthcare professionals must be able to trust 
AI applications. This is why the Ministry of Health, Welfare 
Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence | 17
and Sport has explored the risks and opportunities of 
applying algorithms and AI in healthcare – including legal 
and ethical issues, as well as the associated instruments – 
in four round tables with healthcare parties. Based on the 
outcome of these sessions, the Ministry is examining how 
the application of AI can be facilitated. However, basic 
principles for the use of health data, such as privacy and 
citizens’ control over their own data, will have to be 
observed at all times. 
	ACTIONS:
• At the end of 2019, the Ministry of Health, Welfare 
and Sport will issue a new letter to the House of 
Representatives on AI and Big Data in the 
healthcare sector. 
• The Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport is 
developing an AI Handbook to help parties orient 
themselves in this field.
Agriculture and food 
AI offers great opportunities in agriculture, horticulture 
and food supply, for example through further automation, 
‘precision agriculture’, selection of new varieties (phenoty-
ping), crop cultivation without daylight and system 
integration. AI is also increasingly being used to better 
visualise purchasing and consumption behaviour. For 
example, Wageningen University & Research has 
developed an app that every two hours asks consumers 
what fruit and vegetables they have eaten in the past two 
hours. Together with TNO (Soesterberg), a Big Data tool 
has been developed to collect social media statements 
about fruit and vegetables and analyse the associated 
attitudes and behaviour of citizens. In addition, the Smart 
Dairy Farming project has led to the establishment of the 
JoinData Foundation, a non-profit cooperative that 
enables safe and transparent data distribution in the 
agri-food sector. This is a precondition for data-driven 
analyses that support livestock farmers in their daily 
operations. 
	ACTION:
• The Ministry of Agriculture, Nature and Food 
Quality, together with the Dutch AI Coalition, will 
intensify the further development of a data 
infrastructure for arable farming. 
Energy transition and sustainability 
Mobility 
AI can be applied at the level of the engine, the vehicle and 
the driver (and the interaction between them), all road 
users, the supply chain, the traffic and transport system 
and the environment. AI helps identify market trends, 
identify risks, reduce traffic congestion, reduce green-
house gas and air pollutant emissions, design and manage 
transportation, and analyse travel demand and pedestrian 
behaviour. For example, the Directorate-General for Public 
Works and Water Management (Rijkswaterstaat) uses AI to 
predict traffic jams, prevent accidents and optimise the 
Dutch infrastructure. 
AI AND GREENHOUSE TECHNOLOGY 
The need for sustainable and safe production systems 
for fresh food is growing worldwide. The Dutch supply 
cluster of greenhouse technology has a leading 
position worldwide with an annual export value of 
€2.5 billion. The Hortivation Foundation and TNO are 
working on the further development of digital 
cultivation. Within the Data-Driven Integrated 
Growing Systems initiative, TNO has teamed up with 
16 market parties to develop new analysis techniques 
in the field of Big Data and deep learning in order to 
give growers a framework for action vis-à-vis 
operational cultivation decisions. To this end, 
algorithms will be used and knowledge models will be 
developed that open up various data sources inside 
and outside the greenhouse (e.g. climate, hardware, 
cultivation activities). Co-creation and new business 
models are supporting the implementation and 
scaling up of the innovations developed in the market.
Energy transition
The switch to sustainable energy supply under the 
government’s Climate Agreement calls for smart solutions 
to make good use of the various variable energy sources. 
The solutions developed for these types of flexibility and 
congestion markets range from energy source selection in 
buildings, the role of electric cars in the energy system, 
error detection in electricity networks and providing highly 
detailed insight into the energy networks. The focus is 
currently shifting to system design, to create a system of 
systems. Energy will have to be available under any 
circumstances, irrespective of weather conditions and 
transition choices; preferably as sustainable and affordable 
a manner as possible. This increasingly complex puzzle 
requires the use of new technology – for operational 
management, but also for solid investment decisions. 
18 | Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence
In this regard, special attention is paid to the transition to 
sustainable industry and to multiple use of space in the 
North Sea. If industrial parties switch to hydrogen, for 
example, this will have consequences for the required 
infrastructure and supply of hydrogen, but also for the 
energy balance in the immediate vicinity of these indu-
stries. A well-timed transition offers many opportunities 
but also requires insight and overview. Early explorations 
in the Rotterdam port area are the first of their kind.
With the arrival of offshore wind farms, the North Sea is 
another area where many interests are at stake – from 
fishing to the cultivation of seaweed. There is a need for 
information about the North Sea, the seabed and how 
they develop over time. The construction and main-
tenance of wind turbines in bleak conditions far away from 
the coast has led to many Dutch innovations, such as 
inspections with drones, maintenance robots and vertical 
piling of foundations. A coordinator commissioned by the 
Energy ‘Top Sector’ and Dutch Digital Delta ‘Top Team’ will 
design and accelerate the use of AI with respect to the 
above-mentioned themes.
SELF-DRIVING CARS 
The use of AI is increasing strongly in the automotive world, from ‘under the hood’ (predictive maintenance) to the 
environment. Cars are evolving into programmable, connected platforms full of sensors that exchange data with 
other vehicles and with the infrastructure. Alongside the traditional car manufacturers, parties such as Google are 
becoming increasingly important. In the years ahead, we will see a strong development of autonomous systems for 
real-time estimation and prediction algorithms for vehicles, drivers and environmental conditions. This development 
will be based on existing and newly acquired data sources. An integrated approach to this data, including the 
context and environment of the autonomous vehicle, will result in a more complete but also more complex and 
possibly ambiguous picture. This is expected to increase safety, but also raises questions, for example about dealing 
with uncertainties within autonomous systems. Who is responsible for controlling the vehicle? How can autonomous 
driving AI algorithms be checked and explained to the various stakeholders for acceptance and safety, etc.? The 
National Research Institute for Mathematics and Computer Science (CWI), the Netherlands Organisation for Applied 
Scientific Research (TNO), the University of Amsterdam's (UvA) Faculty of Law and Institute of Informatics have 
joined forces to find answers to these questions within a collaborative project named ‘Meaningful Control of 
Autonomous Systems’.
Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence | 19
The government makes optimal use of AI in 
the performance of public tasks
The government aims to use the potential of AI for the 
performance of public tasks, e.g. in public space and the 
social domain, to maximum effect. For example, AI 
applications can contribute to better work processes of 
various government organisations and better solutions to 
societal issues. This requires effective cooperation, for 
example to combine data collected by different parties.  
It is also important for governments to experiment with AI 
applications and challenge market parties to come up with 
innovative solutions for better execution of tasks.
The government can integrate AI 
applications organisationally
In order to be able to integrate AI applications from an 
organisational point of view, the government will first 
need to ensure that sufficient knowledge and expertise are 
available. This is particularly important because, as 
explained in Track 3, the application of AI must meet high 
standards especially in the government domain, for 
example in terms of care, transparency and proportionate 
deployment. In AI applications for government functions, 
public values such as equal treatment, privacy, human 
dignity, autonomy and security must be taken into account 
right from the design phase, a principle known as 
value-based design. This requires technical, legal, ethical 
and organisational expertise. Supported by good commu-
nication, this can contribute to acceptance by the public of 
AI in government functions. Organisational integration 
and administrative support are needed to scale up AI 
solutions. AI can lead to fundamental changes in work 
processes. It may require new forms of collaboration, or a 
complete redesign of business processes. Concrete cases 
can contribute to a structural and responsible embedding 
of AI in the organisation, enabling a smooth roll-out.13  
The experiences gained can be shared within the 
knowledge networks in order to enable governments to 
properly integrate AI into the existing organisation. 
13 For the actions relating to example projects, see the sub-target: ‘ 
The government is experimenting more with AI and is rolling out 
more successful example projects’.
	 ACTIONS:
• The national government is enhancing knowledge 
of AI among civil servants in various ways. 
Examples include the digital course series on AI that 
is available at the Governmental Academy for 
Digitalisation and Computerisation of the 
Government (RADIO) for every civil servant in the 
Netherlands, and attention to AI in the develop-
ment of employees competences. 
• The national government is looking for organisatio-
nal structures (including PPP) that will consolidate 
knowledge within government organisations. 
Dutch governments work better 
with each other, companies and 
knowledge institutions
In the use of AI in the public domain, interdisciplinary 
collaboration and collaboration between organisations are 
crucial in order to safeguard legal and ethical precondi-
tions, share knowledge, make common facilities available 
and support the removal of specific obstacles to a further 
roll-out. A number of government organisations, universi-
ties and companies have AI knowledge in specific areas 
which is also interesting for other government agencies. 
The government is constantly looking for ways to streng-
then collaboration among government bodies, the business 
community and knowledge institutions. This includes 
promoting example projects in the public domain and 
making data available and sharing it for those projects. 
This is in line with the activities of the Dutch AI Coalition. 
20 | Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence
  ACTIONS:
• The Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations 
and the Netherlands Enterprise Agency are 
developing an implementation toolkit for innova-
tive technologies. This also involves seeking 
interdisciplinary cooperation with, among others, 
the Chief Information Officers of other government 
agencies and with contractors. 
• Together with the Association of Netherlands 
Municipalities (VNG) and the Netherlands 
Enterprise Agency, the Ministry of the Interior and 
Kingdom Relations organises meetings on 
experiences in the public domain and the AI 
technologies used there, such as chatbots.
• The national government organises expert 
meetings for professionals in various technical 
disciplines that deal with AI applications on a daily 
basis. These include architects, developers and data 
scientists from various organisations. 
• Active participation in European public sector 
initiatives within the framework of the coordinated 
Action Plan for AI. These may take the form of calls 
to realise AI example projects.
The government is experimenting 
more with AI and is rolling out 
more successful example projects
The government is already experimenting with AI 
extensively, with a view to its successful roll-out. A risk 
assessment survey by TNO on the application of AI in the 
public sector shows that experiments with AI applications 
such as chatbots, decision algorithms and translation 
algorithms are taking place at various locations within the 
government. 
  ACTIONS: 
• In collaboration with other government organisati-
ons and the Association of Netherlands Munici-
palities (VNG), the Ministry of the Interior and 
Kingdom Relations is conducting two experiments 
with AI in 2019, focusing on ethics in, by and for 
design and the transparency of algorithms. The 
ambition is to build up a portfolio of example 
projects, which will be shared in the knowledge 
network. 
• Many government bodies, including the Ministry of 
Social Affairs and Employment, the Ministry of the 
Interior and Kingdom Relations, the Ministry of 
Justice and Security and several municipalities, 
pursue poverty reduction policies. Initiatives are 
combined as much as possible in order to come to 
high-quality proposals. This involves the early 
identification of potential poverty, which can 
prevent suffering and high costs. 
• Various government organisations are experimen-
ting with text mining, for example to make it easier 
to search archives (JustID) and council documents 
(Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations, 
VNG). The intention is to use AI in follow-up 
projects.
• Several government organisations are exploring the 
possibilities of new technologies in procurement, 
with a focus on blockchain and AI. The ‘Sustainable 
digitalisation of public procurement’ (Duurzame 
digitalisering van de Rijksinkoop) programme focuses 
on AI. This concerns the purchase of generic 
services from the government and the systems that 
have been set up for this purpose. 
• Various government agencies, such as the police, 
the Netherlands Enterprise Agency and ‘P-Direkt’ 
(the Shared Service Centre for HRM of the Dutch 
government) are developing a chatbot.
Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence | 21
The government is using more 
resources to encourage 
companies to develop AI for its 
public tasks
When it comes to procurement, the government is a major 
player in various sectors. With a procurement volume of 
€73.3 billion, the government invests considerable 
amounts, mainly in the physical environment, the social 
domain and security. As such, the government has a major 
influence on the degree of innovation and the utilisation 
of the opportunities offered by AI. 
Many innovative applications are developed by innovative 
SMEs. By making good use of the range of instruments 
offered by public procurement legislation, innovative 
companies can also be given a chance. This may include 
things such as innovation partnerships (deployed in 
‘Startup in Residence’ programmes), Small Business 
Innovation Research (SBIR)14 and instruments that finance 
the development of innovations, particularly by SMEs. 
Governments can also enter into a dialogue with the 
business community before the tender procedure takes 
place.
14 SBIR is a form of tendering in which companies can develop 
innovative solutions to the societal demands of the government by 
means of a stepped innovation competition (first phase feasibility 
study, second phase prototype development).
  ACTIONS: 
• The Ministry of Justice and Security and the 
Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations 
have accepted 21 proposals for feasibility studies in 
phase 1 of SBIR AI in the public sector; proposals for 
phase 2 will be accepted in 2020. A second SBIR 
with a regional party is being prepared.
• Over the next few years, various government 
ministries, including the Ministry of Justice and 
Security and the Ministry of the Interior and 
Kingdom Relations, will take part in Odyssey, the 
world’s largest hackathon in Groningen, in various 
different tracks. In Odyssey, the business commu-
nity is challenged to develop initiatives for AI 
solutions in response to specific government needs. 
• In the coming years, ministries will use the various 
instruments within procurement legislation to 
promote innovation in the market. In addition to 
SBIR, this also concerns innovation partnerships, 
market consultation and the competitive dialogue. 
22 | Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence
AI entrepreneurship is stimulated
AI offers enormous opportunities for service and techno-
logy companies, for example helping them increase 
productivity, set up flexible production systems and 
provide customised solutions. AI makes companies more 
competitive, more future-proof and strengthens the 
competitive position of the country as a whole. AI opens 
up possibilities to automate complex tasks. It enables 
companies to predict machine maintenance needs, ensure 
product quality and better plan processes that save costs 
and resources. In addition, AI can help to make more 
efficient use of raw materials. Finally, AI-driven companies 
are very important for solving societal challenges, as 
indicated earlier in this chapter.
Many large Dutch companies are already working on 
deepening their knowledge of AI and using it to improve 
their services and productivity. However, most of these AI 
activities are still in the planning or pilot phase. Adoption 
among SMEs and the number of start-ups and scale-ups 
needs to increase significantly. Large companies can help 
SMEs, start-ups and scale-ups to develop and apply 
AI-driven innovations and new business models. Some of 
the problems faced by these companies are characteristic 
of problems in other technical sectors, such as access to 
knowledge, scarce risk capital, scarce talent and internati-
onalisation. A strong AI industry is important for the 
Netherlands, also in view of the ambition to seize the 
opportunities of human-centric AI for the economy and 
society. That is why extra attention is devoted to AI 
entrepreneurship, especially within existing policy actions. 
In addition, the AI Coalition plays an important role in 
creating a favourable business climate for AI in the 
Netherlands. 
PROCESS OPTIMISATION
A number of companies have already implemented AI 
to optimise their processes. For example, VORtech is 
using AI to detect and locate leaks in pipeline 
networks. Dutch water companies use large networks 
of pipelines, so any leakage can have major 
consequences. The AI application analyses deviations 
in pressure and flow rates within the pipeline network 
day and night in order to detect leaks. It ensures that 
any problems are solved quickly so that water ‘simply’ 
continues to flow from the tap.
Another company, EPCOR, uses AI to predict 
maintenance needs on Auxiliary Power Units (APU) 
for 30 different airlines worldwide. By collecting data 
from the APU and then analysing it with AI, flight 
operation is more reliable and the costs of 
maintenance are lower. It also contributes to flight 
safety and the prevention of flight delays.
Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence | 23
The government encourages 
AI-related start-ups and scale-
ups in the development of 
applications 
The more than 300 AI-driven start-ups and scale-ups in 
the Netherlands (over 9000 FTEs) operate mainly in the 
field of business software, care, marketing and fintech.15 
They benefit from a favourable environment for techno-
logy-driven entrepreneurship and access to talent, capital, 
knowledge, networks and markets. AI start-ups and 
scale-ups face specific obstacles. It is particularly difficult 
for them to recruit AI staff, as they are often unable to pay 
high, fixed salaries.
In order to stimulate technology-driven entrepreneurship, 
a new government-wide start-up and scale-up strategy 
was published in June 2018, with an implementation 
budget of €65 million. This will improve the business 
climate for start-ups and scale-ups, and StartupDelta will 
be continued for four years under the name TechLeap.nl, 
with more focus on the further growth of start-ups and 
scale-ups. The new programme includes a centre of 
expertise and a national growth programme. This provides 
approximately 50 promising Dutch scale-ups per year with 
access to international networks. It is expected that many 
AI start-ups/scale-ups will participate. The strategy also 
includes measures to improve access to diverse talent 
(AI-related and otherwise). 
It is important for start-ups to find their first customers 
and clients. Governments and large companies play a role 
as launching customers or clients, involving start-ups in 
solving their innovation issues. This may take the form of 
challenges, competitions, ‘Startup-in-Residence’ 
programmes, experiments or a consortium. In addition,  
AI start-ups and scale-ups require a great deal of capital, 
even more than ‘regular’ start-ups and scale-ups16, in 
order to be able to scale up quickly in an internationally 
competitive market. It is also important for AI start-ups 
and scale-ups to be able to grow rapidly internationally 
and gain access to international networks and markets. 
The trade and innovation departments in the foreign 
missions support them in these efforts.
15 StartupDelta, ‹Artificial Intelligence in the Netherlands – Startup 
Report 2018›, 2018.
16 Roland Berger & Asgard, ‘Artificial Intelligence – A strategy for 
European startups – Recommendations for policymakers’, 2018.
  ACTIONS:
• The Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy 
is increasing access to innovation financing for 
start-ups (AI-related and otherwise) through 
early-stage financing and the Innovation Credit 
(Innovatiekrediet), and is facilitating access to risk 
capital for start-ups with the ‘Seed Capital Scheme’, 
the ‘Dutch Venture Initiative’, the scale-up fund and 
via the Regional Development Agencies (RDAs) 
(Regionale Ontwikkelingsmaatschappijen, ROMs) 17. 
• In the supplementary agreement concluded 
between the Ministry of Economic Affairs and 
Climate Policy, the Ministry of Finance and 
Invest-NL, AI is included as one of the focus areas 
for Invest-NL. The Ministry of Economic Affairs and 
Climate Policy and the Ministry of Finance are 
exploring a change in the tax rules which will make 
it more attractive to pay out in stock options – and 
thus to work for a start-up or scale-up.
• The Ministry of Justice and Security, the Ministry of 
Social Affairs and Employment and the Ministry of 
Economic Affairs and Climate Policy are drafting 
legislation relating to the right of residence for 
essential employees of start-ups and scale-ups.  
The legislation will enter into force in the summer 
of 2020.
• The Ministry of Foreign Affairs will appoint six 
start-up liaison officers to its posts in San Francisco/
Los Angeles, New York/Boston, Singapore, Berlin, 
Paris and London by 2020 at the latest. 
• TechLeap.nl (formerly StartupDelta) organises 
missions to start-up and technology fairs and 
prominent tech hubs, and start-ups and scale-ups 
are more closely involved in trade and innovation 
missions and ‘Top Sector’ missions.
17 The RDAs are an instrument of the Ministry of Economic Affairs and 
Climate Policy and the provinces involved for the regional 
implementation of economic and innovation policy. They provide a 
regional stimulus to innovative SMEs in business development, 
strategic acquisition, trade facilitation and investments in start-ups 
and scale-ups. 
24 | Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence
Companies (including SMEs) make use 
of knowledge and applied research
The exchange of knowledge and the sharing of tools 
between researchers and businesses, for example via research 
labs, field labs and smart industry hubs, is crucial for the valorisa-
tion of AI research and innovation. Wherever possible, the 
research labs seek cooperation with relevant Smart Industry field 
labs18 to share knowledge and tools more broadly. The six RDAs 
have dozens of AI companies in their portfolios and play a role in 
strengthening AI-driven entrepreneurship. For example, the 
Limburg Business Development Fund of LIOF (the Regional 
Development Agency of the Province of Limburg) provided eight 
early-stage AI-related financings and grants totalling €3.8 million. 
New AI-driven growth is also relevant for the broader, late-adap-
tors concerning innovation, SMEs. In this segment, AI helps to 
organise repetitive work more easily, planning and stockpiling are 
more accurate and demand-driven, and chatbots can help with 
customer queries. Businesses often find it difficult to keep up with 
the fast pace of innovation and to use technology and especially AI 
successfully in their company. The ‘Accelerating the digitalisation 
of SMEs’ (Versnelling digitalisering MKB) programme and an 
information programme of the Chamber of Commerce can help 
them with this. Higher professional education (HBO), with more 
than 15,000 Information and Communication Technology (ICT) 
students and a large number of ICT professors, can help (innova-
tive) SMEs with useful and high-quality AI knowledge, for example 
by means of short-term and solution-focused research through 
the use of students and trainees. In addition, the European 
Commission is developing a network of digital innovation hubs for 
AI in Europe19 to accelerate the application of AI in SMEs, with TNO 
as the Dutch point of contact.
18 There are currently 39 of them, including Tata Steel, Philips and Campione, 
which are experimenting with effective production and preventive 
maintenance.
19 This is done in collaboration with the industry-driven European AI Public-
Private Partnership, led by the Big Data Value Association and the European 
Robotics Association. 
  ACTIONS:
• As of 2019, the government will scale up the 
‘Accelerating the digitalisation of SMEs’ (Versnelling 
digitalisering MKB) programme, including five 
regional SME workshops in which education, the 
government and the business community 
collaborate.
• In 2019, RDAs will jointly explore how they can 
specifically stimulate entrepreneurship using AI.
• The Dutch AI Coalition is working out a plan to 
create more synergy between research, education 
and organisations. 
• Five regional smart industry hubs and research 
centres (data value hubs) provide companies, 
particularly SMEs that are late-adaptors concerning 
innovation, with up-to-date knowledge, tools and 
training modules for the responsible use of AI and 
data. The hubs organise workshops for SMEs, issue 
feasibility vouchers and work with vocational 
education on the development of digital skills.
• In the smart industry approach, the sharing of 
knowledge and valorisation of research with 
respect to AI applications will be strengthened.
• TNO connects the Dutch field labs and hubs with 
the European AI Digital Innovation Network.
• As of 2020, the Chamber of Commerce will be 
providing SMEs with business-oriented information 
about AI, based in part on best practice examples 
from the SME Workshops. 
• The ICT research platform improves the visibility of 
practice-based ICT research in the Netherlands, 
together with the employers’ umbrella organisati-
ons VNO-NCW (Confederation of Netherlands 
Industry and Employers) and MKB-Nederland 
(Dutch Federation of Small and Medium-Sized 
Enterprises), HBO-i20, SIA21 and 50 HBO professors. 
Target: by 2020, 200 SMEs will be working with 
innovative ICT applications, including AI.
20 The HBO-i foundation is a partnership of ICT courses in higher 
professional education in the Netherlands.
21 SIA is the National Coordinating Body for Applied Scientific Research 
(Nationaal Regieorgaan Praktijkgericht Onderzoek) of the Netherlands 
Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO).
Track 2: Creating the right conditions
In order to accelerate AI development, the government wants the Netherlands to have a vibrant AI climate with 
conditions that support and promote AI research and the development, marketing and deployment of AI applications. 
This requires a number of key ingredients: high-quality research and innovation, a workforce with the right knowledge 
and skills to develop and work with AI, access to sufficient high-quality data, and high-quality and intelligent digital 
connectivity. Given its aim to boost AI developments in the Netherlands, the government is fully committed to achieving 
these conditions.
26 | Strategisch Actieplan voor Artificiële Intelligentie
AI research and innovation 
in the Netherlands 
Excellent training 
opportunities Usable data Connectivity
Digital literacy for primary and 
secondary education
Vocational and higher education
Sharing data
Computing power
Intelligent connectivity
Stimulate fundamental and 
applied research into AI
Beer international
cooperation
Actions include:
• The Dutch Research Council 
(NWO) publishes an AI research 
agenda 
• Establishing an AI knowledge 
centre that is leading in Europe 
• Dutch Ministry of Education, 
Culture and Science (OCW) 
invests in the supercomputer at 
SURF
Actions include:
• The Netherlands is prominently 
active in European AI consortia 
like BVDA/EURobotics, AI4EU, 
CLAIRE and ELLIS.
• Strengthening international AI 
cooperation through the 
Holland Innovation Network 
and economic missions.
Actions include:
• AI is one of the a focus areas 
in the innovation actions of 
the Digital Connectivity 
Action Plan.
Actions include:
• The Regional Investment Fund  
improves the alignment of the 
Secondary vocational education 
with the labour market.
• National Data Science trainee 
programme.
Actions include:
• Inclusion of digital literacy in 
revised curriculum for 
primary and secondary 
education.
 
• Businesses improve their 
support to education 
through the Digitalisation 
Agenda for primary and 
secondary education.
Actions include:
• The STAP-scheme (labour 
market position stimulus) 
invests in individual budgets for 
training and development 
(€200 million).
• A multi-annual programme for 
the improvement of Lifelong 
Development.
Actions include:
• Inventory of data sharing 
solutions amongst others for AI 
and data markets. 
• The Netherlands actively 
contributes to Common 
European Data Space (including 
for AI). 
Actions include:
• Promote FAIR principles for 
private data sharing for AI.
• Promote the reuse of public 
data via data.overheid.nl and 
developer.overheid.nl.
Actions include:
• Exploration of AI applications to 
improve network performance.
Actions include:
• In the Digital Europe 
Programme, the Nether-
lands is commied to 
collaborating on research 
and innovation of High-Per-
formance Computing for AI.
Beer opportunities for
further training
Usable data Connectivity
Track 2 | Creating the right conditions
Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence | 27
AI research and innovation in the Netherlands 
are of high quality and leading in Europe
The Netherlands aspires to remain competitive in Europe 
and distinguish itself with top-quality AI research and 
innovation. Cooperation and investment in research are 
needed to attract additional researchers and many more 
AI companies, for new knowledge, talent and skills for the 
jobs, services, products and work processes of the future. 
The Netherlands must have an innovation system that 
stimulates both fundamental and applied AI research and 
promotes knowledge sharing. Pooling forces for a strong 
public–private knowledge base and synergy with European 
consortia are crucial. In this way, knowledge can circulate 
and be more effectively used (‘valorised’). Small and 
medium-sized enterprises, as well as start-ups and 
scale-ups, must also be able to participate. 
The Netherlands has an innovation 
system that stimulates 
fundamental and applied research 
on AI
Fundamental and groundbreaking AI research forms the 
basis for research and innovation and, by extension, for 
training, recruiting and retaining diverse talent. AI is 
innovating the way research is done in all areas of science, 
from medical diagnostics (cancer research), digital 
humanities (behavioural research) to astronomy (analysis 
of telescope data on black holes). AI is applied in all fields 
of science: from medical diagnostics to longitudinal file 
studies and from mobility research to media studies.  
AI also leads to new knowledge and innovation, for 
example through synergy between genetic, medical and AI 
knowledge. The Netherlands has world-class AI research 
within its borders, especially in the field of machine 
learning based on image, language, text, video and sound, 
and in the digital humanities.22 
22 Elsevier, ‘Artificial Intelligence: How knowledge is created, 
transferred and used’, 2018.
Both fundamental and applied AI research are needed.  
To facilitate curiosity-driven fundamental research in the 
area of ICT and AI, the Ministry of Education, Culture and 
Science is investing in a broad knowledge base of 
universities and institutes, in the National Science Agenda, 
in sectoral plans and Top Sectors and ICT infrastructure. 
Within this broad scientific approach, the ministry is also 
investing in several larger AI-related initiatives: 
Commit2data, VWData and Prevention and Big Data.  
The National Science Agenda is a broad, social, connecting 
and innovative initiative, with an eye for the importance of 
promoting diverse talent. The emphasis is on fundamental 
research linked to applied and practical research. More 
research and innovation are needed to develop AI in such 
a way that it is human-centric, trustworthy, transparent 
and explainable; see also Track 3 of this Plan (the 
Netherlands is conducting more research into the 
development and application of responsible AI). Within 
the National Science Agenda, digitalisation in general is 
part of almost all routes and artificial intelligence is 
specific to the ‘Value creation through responsible access 
to and use of Big Data’ (Waardecreatie door verantwoorde 
toegang tot en gebruik van big data) route. The VWData 
programme originated from the impulse generated by the 
launch of the National Science Agenda. Ministerial 
departments have the opportunity to invest in AI-related 
research themselves. The Ministry of Health, Welfare and 
Sport has chosen to invest in Prevention and Big Data and 
this investment has been doubled from the National 
Science Agenda. To ensure that researchers have access to 
sufficient computing capacity, the Ministry of Education, 
Culture and Science is investing €18 million in a new 
national supercomputer at SURF.
In recent years, the relative share of Dutch publications on 
AI has dropped from 4% to less than 2% of publications 
worldwide, mainly because other countries have  
significantly increased their efforts. A broad AI research 
agenda, cooperation and targeted investments are 
important to be able to capitalise on the opportunities 
that AI research offers to Dutch science, economy and 
society. 
28 | Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence
To utilise the results of AI research, collaboration between 
knowledge institutions, civil society organisations and the 
business community is crucial. Moreover, it calls for 
combinations of technological and non-technological 
disciplines. This is done for AI as a key enabling technology 
within the mission-driven innovation policy on the 
initiative of the Dutch Digital Delta ‘Top Team’.
Field- and industry labs have been initiated by the 
universities, in collaboration with companies and civil 
society organisations that have joined forces in ICAI.  
There are now nine AI Labs, each with at least five PhD 
students, in which companies and government organisa-
tions collaborate directly. These include two AholdDelhaize 
retail labs (UvA and Delft University of Technology 
(TU Delft)), an ING fintech lab and a National Policy Lab AI. 
This is unique in Europe. The Ministry of Defence is 
running specific research programmes on AI applications 
in the security domain, in close collaboration with NATO 
partners, the business community and universities and 
knowledge centres such as TNO, the National Aerospace 
Laboratory (NLR) and the Maritime Research Institute 
Netherlands (MARIN).
The European Commission is encouraging large AI 
excellence research centres as part of the European AI 
approach for top research, talent, technology, applications 
and responsible AI use. Combining fundamental and 
applied research in value chains generates an important 
added value for a national and European approach. The 
Dutch AI Coalition is working on a plan to position the 
Netherlands as a leading AI research centre in Europe.
ACTIONS23:
• After the summer of 2019, NWO will publish a 
broad AI research agenda for initiating new 
research programmes and tools and generating 
national and international synergy. 
• Ministries are exploring the possibility of investing 
in an AI programme as part of Action Line 2 of the 
National Science Agenda (Nationale 
Wetenschapsagenda) in 2020.
• Within the framework of the mission-driven 
innovation policy, long-term programmes will be 
set up for the AI key enabling technology for 
innovative knowledge and solutions with and for 
relevant application areas.
• Based on Dutch strengths such as the AI research 
labs, a proposal will be developed in 2019 under the 
auspices of the Dutch AI Coalition for an AI 
knowledge centre in the Netherlands that is a 
leader in Europe.
• The Ministry of Education, Culture and Science is 
investing €18 million in the purchase of a national 
supercomputer for SURF. 
• The TO2s24 organise joint workshops on AI topics 
such as explainability, valorisation of research, and 
societal impact. 
• Within the context of the interdepartmental 
programme ‘Strengthening the IT workforce in the 
civil service’ (Versterking HR ICT Rijksdienst) (coordina-
ted by the Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom 
Relations), a cooperation plan will be set up with 
ICT educators in higher education. This plan aims to 
boost innovation and the development of the 
national government on specific themes (including 
AI) by setting up field labs. 
• The Ministry of Defence is having its strategic 
knowledge partners (TNO, NLR and MARIN) carry 
out research programmes in which AI is developed 
and applied.
• The ‘Data Science, Artificial Intelligence & Quantum 
Technology for Military Applications’ knowledge 
centre is developing AI application possibilities for 
the Ministry of Defence and is collaborating with 
TNO.
23 See Track 1 for the development of a long-term, public-private 
programme for AI research and innovation for societal challenges 
(part of the mission-driven innovation policy).
24 TO2s are the applied research institutes united in Federation TO2. 
Federation TO2 consists of Deltares, ECN, Marin, NLR, TNO and 
Wageningen-Research.
Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence | 29
  ACTIONS:
• The Netherlands provides visible involvement in 
the major initiatives for broad European coopera-
tion on AI, such as: the Strategic Research Agenda 
by BVDA/EURobotics27 (with 300 industrial and 
academic partners), the establishment of a specific 
AI PPP on behalf of the European Commission and 
international academic initiatives, such as CLAIRE 
and ELLIS (European Lab for Learning & Intelligent 
Systems). 
• The Netherlands will continue its current participa-
tion in future European programmes, such as 
Horizon Europe, Digital Europe and EUREKA, 
including through the Dutch National Contact Point 
for European programmes and innovation 
missions.
• The Netherlands is strengthening its cooperation 
with other Member States and European initiatives, 
including through the Holland Innovation Network 
and economic missions.
• The Netherlands is actively seeking collaboration 
on AI with other countries within and outside 
Europe, such as Germany, France, Singapore, the US 
and Belgium. For example, an innovation mission 
to Singapore will be organised at the end of 2019 
for collaboration in the field of AI, and in 2020 
opportunities will be explored for effective bilateral 
collaboration between the US and the Netherlands 
in specific AI areas. 
• The Netherlands Foreign Investment Agency (NFIA) 
has included Artificial Intelligence as a primary focus 
area in its Strategic Action Plan, ‘The Netherlands: 
Digital Gateway to Europe’ and will focus a 
substantial part of its acquisition activities on it. 
27 A partnership of the Big Data Value Association and the European 
Robotics Association.
Dutch companies and knowledge 
institutions will cooperate more 
effectively internationally, 
especially in European consortia
The European Commission is strongly committed to 
public–private investment in research and innovation in 
the field of AI.25 It wants public and private parties to 
invest at least €20 billion in AI until 2020 and then up to 
more than €20 billion per year until 2027.26 For its part, the 
Commission is making €1.5 billion available to AI under the 
current Horizon 2020 framework programme until 2020. 
For the EU’s next long-term budget (2021–2027), the 
Commission has proposed to invest at least €7 billion from 
Horizon Europe and the Digital Europe Programme in AI.
The Netherlands is already benefiting from the European 
opportunities and will continue to focus on them. Within 
the European Horizon 2020 programme, €986 million was 
allocated to 580 AI-related projects from 2014 to 2017. 
Dutch parties received €61 million (6.1%) of this. Assuming 
the same share, a budget of €48 million per year will be 
available for Dutch parties in AI-related European projects 
in the coming years. This can only be achieved if Dutch 
parties are and remain well connected at the European 
level by highlighting and supporting European initiatives. 
Several large industrial companies, such as Philips, NXP 
and ASML, have indicated that they intend to invest 
heavily in AI-driven European research and development 
programmes, such as EUREKA, in the coming years. 
The share of Dutch knowledge centres and companies in 
larger AI-related European programmes will be increased 
in the coming years, as will the cooperation with other 
member states on AI research and programmes. The aim is 
to increase the visibility of Dutch AI knowledge and 
expertise and thus to promote opportunities for Dutch 
industry and knowledge centres in research, innovation, 
trade, acquisition and security. 
The Confederation of Laboratories for Artificial Intelligence 
Research in Europe (CLAIRE) is an example of such a 
European programme. CLAIRE is a European partnership 
of thousands of researchers, to which more than 300 
Dutch organisations (universities, large companies and the 
European Space Agency in Noordwijk) are affiliated. 
CLAIRE focuses on the development of human-centric AI, 
which is an important Dutch and European core value for 
all areas of AI. With the support of the municipality, CLAIRE 
has recently established its headquarters in The Hague.
25 See Appendix 2 for an overview of European funds. 
26 This represents all investments across the EU (including Norway, 
Switzerland and the UK).
30 | Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence
The Netherlands has excellent training 
opportunities for living with AI and more 
talent for working with AI
The labour market is changing rapidly as a result of 
technological progress and digitalisation. This requires 
adaptability and flexibility in the labour market and in the 
education system. Workers not only need to keep their 
knowledge and skills up to date, but also to continue to 
develop them throughout their working lives. Vocational 
and higher education should train more and more diverse 
students, providing them with the expertise needed to 
work with AI. The foundation for this will be laid in primary 
and secondary education, where digital literacy will 
become part of the curriculum within the context of the 
comprehensive curriculum review.
Everyone has more and better 
access to continuing education 
for AI-related knowledge and 
skills
Contrary to previous technological breakthroughs, which 
mainly took over physical and routine tasks, AI will also 
take on mental tasks. It is still unclear whether the total 
number of jobs will increase or decrease as a result of AI. 
However, it is expected that the tasks that make up jobs 
and the skills that they require will change drastically. On 
the one hand this concerns AI-specific skills, on the other 
hand human and interpersonal skills that AI cannot 
replace.28 AI-related skills and knowledge, such as digital 
skills, AI literacy, conceptual thinking and the ability to 
assess the implications of AI, are becoming important to 
all of us.29 Different groups will also need to develop 
different skills, depending on how and to what extent AI 
influences their work.
28 MacCrory, F., Westerman, G., Alhammadi, Y., & Brynjolfsson, E. 
(2014). Racing with and against the machine: Changes in occupatio-
nal skill composition in an era of rapid technological advance.
29 Ponce, A. (2018). Artificial Intelligence: A Game Changer for the 
World of Work. Brussel: ETUI.
‘Those who work don’t have to learn anymore’ is a thing of 
the past. The labour market is evolving and changing 
rapidly. Workers (together with employers and public 
authorities) need to invest in their training so that they can 
respond to rapid technological developments and the 
demand for new skills. This is also in the direct interest of 
employers, given the growing shortage of suitable 
personnel. At the same time, it is important to bear in 
mind that successful applications of new technologies are 
to a large extent explained by non-technological determi-
nants.30 In order to promote the success of innovation, 
therefore, it is important to invest not only in new 
technologies, but also in the soft side of innovation, such 
as in the skills of employees. In order to ensure an 
inclusive labour market, the entire labour force must be 
included in AI development, where everyone is given the 
necessary space and stimulated to invest in their develop-
ment.31 This is not yet the case: at present, it is mainly 
those with higher education and permanent contracts who 
engage in courses, education or training.32 
30 These non-technological determinants of innovation are also 
referred to as ‘social innovation’. Volberda et al. define social 
innovation as the development of new management skills, the use 
of innovative forms of organisation, the establishment of 
high-quality employment relationships and partnerships to improve 
competitiveness and productivity. See: Volberda, H., Jansen, J., 
Tempelaar, M., & Heij, K., ‘Monitoren van sociale innovatie: slimmer 
werken, dynamisch managen en flexibel organiseren’, Tijdschrift 
voor HRM 2018, 1, p. 85-110.
31 According to the think tank DenkWerk (2019), over the next ten years 
three million workers will need digital education, and between 40 
and 45 thousand people will have to retrain every year. This will 
require an annual investment of 6 to 7 billion euros. So more seems 
to be needed. 
32 Poulissen, D., van Eldert, P., Fouarge, D., & de Grip, A. (2018). Leren 
onder werkenden met een kwetsbare positie op de arbeidsmarkt 
(No. 005). Maastricht University, Research Centre for Education and 
the Labour Market (ROA).
Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence | 31
Vocational and higher education 
train more students with talent 
to work with AI
The education system will have to respond actively to the 
changing demand for labour and thus to new training 
needs. Collaboration between education, business and 
research institutions enables new technologies to be 
applied quickly in training. Within the Education 
Innovation with ICT Acceleration Plan (Versnellingsplan 
Onderwijsinnovatie met ICT), so-called acceleration zones are 
being set up to improve the connection of study 
programmes to the labour market and promote the 
professionalisation of instructors. The Digitalisation 
Agendas for Senior secondary vocational education and 
training (MBO) and primary and secondary education also 
include the ambition to make teachers digitally proficient.
There is a great need for (both male and female) AI experts 
and data professionals. The popularity of AI and Computer 
Science programmes is growing so rapidly that universities 
are finding it difficult to accommodate this growth. As a 
result, all universities with a bachelor’s programme in AI 
have set an enrolment restriction for the coming academic 
year (2019–2020). They are struggling to find enough 
lecturers and the funds to pay them. This is undesirable. 
The universities have been asked, therefore, to include this 
capacity problem in their sectoral plans33 and to seek 
cooperation with other universities and with companies 
and other employers. Following the advice of the Van Rijn 
Committee34, the higher education sector will see a review 
of the flat-rate basic grant of education funding from 2020 
onwards35, based on the percentage of students in science 
and technology and other variables. The technical 
universities, together with the general universities and 
universities of applied sciences, will draw up a sectoral 
plan for STEM study programmes, in order to improve 
training capacity, study success rates and the connection 
with the labour market. 
Even if all current capacity issues are resolved and the 
number of graduates continues to grow, the huge demand 
for AI experts and data professionals will not be met. 
Additional measures are needed, including encouraging 
boys and girls to opt for degree programmes in ICT, 
attracting foreign talent and retraining workers from 
shrinking sectors. Businesses can also help by investing in 
and freeing up capacity for education. 
33 Sectoral plans are being used to invest in strengthening the research 
base.
34 Parliamentary Paper 31288, No. 726. 
35 Parliamentary Paper 31288, No. 744.
  ACTIONS:
• A scheme that will structurally make more than 
€200 million available in the form of individual 
budgets for training and development will be 
presented to the House of Representatives after the 
summer of 2019. This ‘STAP’ (Labour Market 
Position Stimulus) budget replaces the current tax 
deduction scheme for training and is accessible to 
everyone up to the state pension age. 
• In order to encourage employers to invest in 
individual learning budgets, the Ministry of Social 
Affairs and Employment is working with the 
Ministry of Finance, the Tax and Customs 
Administration (Belastingdienst), sectors and 
executives to clarify the tax treatment of individual 
learning and development budgets.
• The Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment is 
developing a scheme to implement the Wiersma 
motion, which will structurally make €48 million a 
year available from 2020 to promote a learning 
culture in SMEs, and the Heerma motion, which will 
make a total of €60 million available over a period 
of five years to provide additional support to the 
agricultural, hospitality and recreation sectors in 
order to attract more ‘BBL’ students (students in 
the ‘work-based’ VET learning pathway).
• With ‘MKB!dee’, the Ministry of Economic Affairs 
and Climate Policy is challenging SMEs to come up 
with ideas that will lead to more investment in 
training and development of workers. While 
intended for all SMEs, the scheme focuses in 
particular on the challenges of technical SMEs and 
digitalisation. It relates to the broad effects of 
digitalisation, not to the ICT sector as such. In 2019, 
€7.5 million is available. 
• The Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment, the 
Ministry of Education, Culture and Science and the 
Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy are 
carrying out a long-term, action-oriented program-
me to improve the preconditions for Lifelong 
Development (LLD), including pilots with training 
and employment help desks (leerwerkloketten) in 
various regions, further flexibilisation of the range 
of courses on offer and assessment of the feasibility 
of a digital training overview. 
• The Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment and 
the NWO are investing approximately €3 million in 
research to gain more insight into the impact of 
digital technologies (such as AI) on work and 
employment.
32 | Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence
  ACTIONS:
• The Regioal MBO Investment Fund (Regionaal Investeringsfonds mbo) scheme provides €25 million a year until 2022 
for projects that improve the connection of Senior secondary vocational education (MBO) to the labour market, 
for example if the profession for which they offer training changes as a result of AI. 
• The Foundation for Cooperation on Vocational Education, Training and Labour Market (Samenwerkingsorganisatie 
Beroepsonderwijs Bedrijfsleven, SBB) also pays attention to AI for senior secondary vocational education (middelbaar 
beroepsonderwijs, MBO)in the qualification files, where relevant. A recent example of a new qualification that 
includes AI is ‘software developer’.
• Commissioned by the Minister of Education, Culture and Science, the universities have drawn up sectoral plans 
for the STEM, Social Sciences and Humanities sectors. The Ministry will contribute an extra €70 million to this, 
and the periodic resources for profiling can also be used for this purpose. 
• The Ministry of Education, Culture and Science supports the Education Innovation with ICT Acceleration Plan for 
all higher education institutions (universities of applied sciences and research universities) by making €15 million 
available over four years.36
• In 2019, the Learning Outcomes Experiment (Experiment Leeruitkomsten) will be evaluated, in which higher educa-
tion and the business community experiment with more flexible, tailor-made part-time education for adults, in 
order to enable employees to learn effectively while working. 
• In the summer of 2019, a subsidy scheme will be published to encourage Senior secondary vocational education 
(MBO) institutions to jointly develop innovative and flexible education programmes for workers and jobseekers. 
• The Ministry of Education, Culture and Science is investigating how study programmes can better respond to 
rapid technological developments in the strategic exploration for Senior secondary vocational education (MBO) 
and the Strategic Agenda for Higher Education and Research (publication: autumn 2019). 
• Through the Human Capital Agenda for ICT, the Ministry of Economic Affairs stimulates PPP with the aim to 
promote innovation and knowledge transfer for new technologies in education. This will be kicked off with the 
course, ‘AI in a Day’.
• Starting in September 2019, a second batch of candidates will start working in the National Data Science Trainee 
Programme, in order to develop themselves as data scientists, from the interdepartmental programme 
‘Strengthening the IT workforce in the civil service’ (Versterking HR ICT Rijksdienst) (coordinated by the Ministry of 
the Interior and Kingdom Relations).
• The Ministry of Education, Culture and Science, together with skills development researchers, is exploring how 
digital skills can be applied in HBO and MBO.
• In order to stimulate innovation and development in the national government, a study is being carried out in 
collaboration with ICT trainers in higher education into setting up field labs on specific themes, including AI, from 
the interdepartmental programme ‘Strengthening the IT workforce in the civil service’ (Versterking HR ICT 
Rijksdienst) (coordinated by the Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations).
36 Association of Universities in the Netherlands (VSNU), Netherlands Association of Universities of Applied Sciences (Vereniging Hogescholen) & 
Surf, ‘Versnellingplan Onderwijsinnovatie met ICT’, May 2018. 
Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence | 33
  ACTIONS: 
• In the autumn of 2019, the government will review 
the curriculum for primary and secondary education 
and include digital literacy in it. Legal anchoring is 
planned for 2021. 
• The government is investigating the possibilities of 
setting up an AI Lab for education. 
• The Digitalisation Agenda for primary and secon-
dary education37 aims to provide more and better 
support for education in digitalisation issues by the 
business community in five key areas: innovative 
capacity, digitally literate teachers and pupils, 
digital learning resources, infrastructure and ethics. 
37 Parliamentary Paper 32034, No. 31.
Primary and secondary schools 
teach pupils digital literacy
For the current generation of pupils, the online and offline 
worlds are closely connected. However, this does not 
guarantee that pupils understand what is happening on a 
digital level or that they are actually digitally literate. 
Education has an important role to play in providing equal 
digital opportunities for all boys and girls, regardless of 
origin or background, and in inspiring enthusiasm among 
boys and girls for professions in which digital skills 
predominate. This calls for digitally literate teachers.
Digital literacy is one of the nine learning areas of 
Curriculum.nu, the revision of the curriculum for primary 
and secondary education. In the future, all schools will 
focus on basic ICT skills, information skills, media literacy 
and computational thinking (a collection of thought 
processes such as logical reasoning, systematic thinking 
and pattern recognition). These skills are essential to 
develop, understand and deal with AI.
The increase of AI, also in education itself, has made it 
important to understand the underlying processes. Pupils 
and teachers will have to develop their critical faculties in 
this area. This requires investment in the knowledge and 
skills of teachers. To this end, long-term connections with 
business practice are indispensable. Businesses can help 
by investing in and freeing up capacity for education. So 
far, this has not been sufficiently structured.
34 | Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence
The Netherlands has more usable data for AI 
applications to improve AI developments 
The advantage of data lies in application possibilities such 
as data-driven AI. Dutch businesses and consumers 
benefit from the societal and economic opportunities 
offered by data. Think of car manufacturers, who are more 
likely to find out whether a car is faulty and doctors who 
make better diagnoses. In order to develop high-quality 
and reliable AI applications, usable data (including 
representative, verifiable and shareable data) is crucial38. 
By combining different types of data from different 
parties, valuable new datasets can be created that make 
new AI applications possible. In order to realise this 
potential, it is necessary for public, private and civil society 
organisations to be able to share more data with each 
other. It goes without saying that this must be done 
responsibly and , among other things, with due regard for 
privacy rules. 
The Netherlands has more 
useful data for AI applications
An AI application requires, among other things, high-
quality data. Aspects such as accuracy, completeness, 
reliability, representativeness and timeliness all influence 
the quality of data. Companies and governments benefit 
from high-quality AI applications for economic, ethical and 
safety reasons. This is because high-quality AI applications 
provide more reliable and accurate results, which improve 
forecasting and decision-making. Indeed, low quality data 
can cause bias and imbalances in AI39: bias when the data 
itself contains prejudices (because people have them too), 
bias through prejudice in the algorithms, and imbalances 
when data is not representative. It is important, therefore, 
that the person applying AI is aware of the quality of the 
data used. This is also in line with the action under AI 
research and innovation in the Netherlands are of high quality and 
leading in Europe to make knowledge, tools and training 
modules available for the responsible use of data. 
38 The terms ‘data’ or ‘information’ do not have an unambiguous 
definition. For the purpose of this document, we refer to informa-
tion in digital form: data that is either raw or processed – cleaned, 
formatted, combined and/or structured – to make it suitable for 
analysis or use. In practice, it is increasingly difficult to distinguish 
between data and algorithms; both are also referred to as ‘code’.
39 For example, between men and women or persons with a different 
cultural background.
The required quality of an AI application and, by extension, 
of the data used in it is context-dependent. The required 
quality of data cannot be determined unequivocally; there 
is no single generic quality requirement that is optimal for 
every AI application. In some cases, for example in the 
case of data for a self-driving car, there is a40 great need for 
high-quality data, because this is an AI application with a 
potentially large impact. For data used for an AI applica-
tion that predicts the fastest queue in the supermarket, 
lower quality requirements may apply. 
Finding high-quality data is often a challenge. Datasets 
tend to differ in terms of completeness, accuracy and 
format. Metadata can help AI developers understand the 
origin and composition of a dataset by providing informa-
tion about, for example, the design of the dataset and the 
available data elements. The General Data Protection 
Regulation (GDPR) and the Police Data Act (Wet politiegege-
vens, Wpol) provide clarity about the conditions for the 
(possibly) further processing of data. Apart from that, the 
quality of data and datasets for use depends on the 
purpose for which they are used. If the purpose of the data 
processing changes, the quality (including the risk of bias) 
will have to be reviewed. 
Common principles such as the internationally verified and 
accepted FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, 
Reusable) principles offer a good basis for the standards, 
tools and training per domain or sector. This can be used 
to make data suitable, or to determine its suitability for 
reuse (sharing) by both people and machines under clearly 
described conditions. There is a great deal of focus on data 
standardisation in the healthcare sector, as evidenced by 
various initiatives around the Basic Data Set for Care 
(Basisgegevensset Zorg, BGZ) by Nictiz, the Registration at 
the Source (Registratie aan de Bron) programme of the 
university medical centres and Zorggegevens.nl. The latter 
is a register of all care data and their sources drawn up by 
the Dutch National Institute for Public Health and the 
Environment (RIVM). It does not give access to data, but 
promotes collaboration on the sharing of data by 
providing insight into which parties have access to which 
data.
40 Or data to support decisions in a job interview or in a procedure for 
the early release of a convicted person.
Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence | 35
Public, private and civil society 
organisations share more data 
with each other in a 
responsible manner 
A barrier to AI developments is that developers may not 
have access to certain data, because it is technically 
protected or indirectly protected by being classified as 
intellectual property, trade secrets, state secrets or as a 
potential or actual security risk. Partly with a view to AI 
development, in its vision on data sharing between 
companies the government stated that responsible data 
sharing should become more common than it is now.41 In 
fulfilling its ambition to be at the forefront of promising 
and responsible B2B data sharing, the government is 
guided by three basic principles: (1) data sharing is 
preferably done on a voluntary basis, (2) data sharing is 
mandatory where necessary, and (3) people and 
companies remain in control of data. 
HEALTHCARE 
The Personal Health Train (PHT) is a metaphor for the 
set of agreements, the architecture and 
implementation for the responsible use of health data 
in, among other things, AI applications. The PHT 
builds on the FAIR data principles. Citizens, patients, 
healthcare professionals or researchers run the 
‘trains’ (algorithms) to ask the ‘stations’ (datasets) 
questions and get answers. The key principle 
underlying the PHT is that data is not brought to the 
algorithm, but the algorithm is brought to the data. In 
this way, the data remains at the source, while 
algorithms can still learn from it. This is in line with 
the trend for data to be stored locally. PHT is an 
example of privacy by design, because it enables the 
use of personal data without that data being found in 
the (outcomes of) AI.
41 See also appendix to Parliamentary Paper 26643, No. 594, ‘De 
Nederlandse visie op datadeling tussen bedrijven’ (The Dutch vision 
on data sharing between companies).
  ACTIONS:
• › The Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate 
Policy is exploring the possibilities of stimulating 
the use of the FAIR principles in the sharing of 
private data for AI applications.
• › The Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom 
Relations is stimulating the provision of public 
sector information for re-use, for example via data.
overheid.nl and through the further development 
of the API portal developer.overheid.nl. 
THE ROYAL LIBRARY
The Royal Library of the Netherlands (KB, Koninklijke 
Bibliotheek) uses AI to remain in control of fast-
growing information flows and to provide the user 
with better and more complete information. The KB is 
building AI-based search and find technologies by 
allowing the computer to read and analyse the 
millions of digital texts managed by the KB on 
subjects, persons, places and events. 
Furthermore, the KB actively contributes to the 
development of AI techniques by making historical 
newspaper, book and magazine data available to 
researchers for text and data mining, including in the 
NWO research programme ‘Common Lab Research 
Infrastructure for the Arts and Humanities’. 
In addition, the KB is increasingly making data 
available as training material for international 
benchmark competitions, in order to contribute 
compensating bias to state-of-the-art algorithms. 
The library has the expertise to assess training 
material on the bias that can lead to discriminatory AI 
applications. To this end, it has developed an 
assessment framework to assess the quality of AI on 
the basis of seven principles: accessibility, 
inclusiveness, supervision, transparency, neutrality, 
safety and compliance.
36 | Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence
  ACTIONS:
Various actions are already underway, including those 
resulting from the Vision on Data Sharing Between 
Companies45 and the ‘Data Agenda Overheid’ 
(Government Data Agenda)46, as well as sector-specific 
actions (in the healthcare sector, for instance)47.  
In addition, the following actions will be taken 
specifically for data sharing for AI:
• The Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy 
and the Dutch AI Coalition are organising sector 
dialogues on specific data sharing bottlenecks and 
needs for AI. The Ministry of the Interior and 
Kingdom Relations will be involved in order to 
better align supply and demand of public data with 
the needs of AI applications. 
• The Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy 
will carry out an inventory of existing examples of 
solutions for data sharing for AI (such as the PHT) 
and ways to further stimulate data sharing for AI 
(such as data markets, rewards and innovation 
tools). 
• The European Commission has announced its 
intention to invest in a Common European Data 
Space to increase the availability of data for AI and 
other purposes. The Netherlands will actively 
contribute to the implementation of this initiative 
on the basis of the Dutch vision. 
45 See appendix to Parliamentary Paper 26643, No. 594, ‘De 
Nederlandse visie op datadeling tussen bedrijven’ (The Dutch vision 
on data sharing between companies). 
46 See appendix to Parliamentary Paper 26643, No. 597, ‘NL Digitaal: 
Data Agenda Overheid (NL Digital: Government Data Agenda).
47 Parliamentary Paper 27529, No. 164. 
The Netherlands distinguishes itself by its strong PPPs on 
data sharing. Where data sharing is an opportunity for 
Dutch society or the economy as a whole, the government 
should preferably promote data sharing by facilitating it 
and, if necessary, by regulating it. The government 
facilitates B2B data sharing (see box below). It has a lot of 
data at its disposal, which has been increasingly available 
as open data for a number of years now.42 In accordance 
with European directives, the Dutch government has made 
thousands of datasets available via the data register43 and 
the Netherlands Space Office makes satellite data 
available free of charge via the satellite data portal.44 There 
is also much to be gained from public-private and 
public-public data sharing. 
The creation of a Common European Data Space for AI is 
being discussed at the European level in order to enable 
the seamless exchange of data across borders. 
SYSTEMS FOR DATA SHARING 
In order to be able to apply data-driven AI, it is 
important that companies start sharing data. In 
recent years, data sharing within specific sectors has 
been the subject of framework agreements such as 
‘Ishare’ for the logistics sector and ‘JoinData’ in 
agriculture. Under the Medmij framework agreement 
for patient data, patients are in control of their own 
healthcare data and can decide for themselves who 
gets access to what data. 
In addition to these sectoral initiatives, a declaration 
of intent was signed in May 2019 for a cross-sectoral 
data sharing coalition.
42 See also appendix to Parliamentary Paper 26643, No. 597, ‘NL 
Digitaal: Data Agenda Overheid (NL Digital: Government Data 
Agenda). 
43 https://data.overheid.nl 
44 https://www.spaceoffice.nl/nl/satellietdataportaal/ 
Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence | 37
The Netherlands is at the forefront of Europe 
in high-quality digital and intelligent 
connectivity for effective AI applications
Like other technological innovations, AI requires high-
quality digital connectivity to get off the ground and 
function optimally. This is an important prerequisite for 
effective AI applications in sectors. The Netherlands 
already has a high-quality backbone infrastructure and 
mobile infrastructure that provides excellent regional, 
national and international connectivity. This infrastructure 
is expected to continue to evolve to meet the growing 
demand for connectivity. In this way, the Netherlands is 
positioning itself as an ideal location for AI development 
and applications. AI can also contribute to high-quality 
digital connectivity. Finally, it is important that the 
Netherlands has sufficient access to the computing power 
needed for effective AI applications. 
HIGH-QUALITY DIGITAL CONNECTIVITY FOR 
EFFECTIVE AI APPLICATIONS
High-quality digital connectivity means that, 
depending on the application (AI-related or 
otherwise), the quality parameters latency, data rate, 
and reliability can be set. AI applications such as 
self-driving cars require high reliability and low 
latency. Augmented and virtual reality (AR/VR) 
applications require a high data rate and low latency. 
For effective AI applications, the availability of 
computing power and data processing (local or 
remote) may also be important.
The Dutch fixed and mobile 
networks offer high-quality 
connectivity for AI applications 
and are available anytime and 
anywhere at competitive rates
The government’s Digital Connectivity Action Plan 201848 
describes the necessary steps to ensure high-quality digital 
connectivity. First and foremost, the preconditions must 
be in place for market players to invest sufficiently in the 
further expansion of existing and new connectivity. An 
important development here is the arrival of 5G. This new 
generation of mobile communication is different from 4G 
in several key aspects. 5G can offer higher peak speeds, 
has lower latency rates, and can be tailored more flexibly 
and quickly to meet specific connectivity needs. As a result, 
this technology offers excellent opportunities for new, 
innovative AI applications such as self-driving cars, remote 
surgery and the further optimisation of production 
processes. The Digital Connectivity Action Plan’s actions 
contribute to the high-quality connectivity that this 
requires. 
It is also important that the networks used by AI  
applications are secure. To this end, the Dutch 
Telecommunications Act (Telecommunicatiewet) imposes a 
duty of care on telecom operators. In addition, a bill (the 
Telecommunications Sector (Undesirable Control) Bill 
(wetsvoorstel ongewenste zeggenschap in de telecommunicatie)) 
has been submitted to the House of Representatives for 
discussion. This bill offers the possibility of prohibiting or 
reversing unwanted control in the telecommunications 
sector.
	ACTION:
• AI will be included as a point of attention in the 
elaboration of the actions on innovation in the 
Digital Connectivity Action Plan. 
48 Parliamentary Paper 26643, No. 547.
38 | Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence
AI contributes to high-quality 
connectivity for effective AI 
applications: ‘Intelligent 
connectivity’
AI offers possibilities for far-reaching automation in the 
control, organisation and management of networks. As a 
result, those networks will become more or less autono-
mous and will respond in real time to changing conditions 
in the network or to changing user demand. In this way, 
the network quality and the customer experience can be 
optimised. 
	ACTION:
• The Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy 
will discuss the possibilities of AI applications in 
networks with the parties involved. 
POSSIBILITIES RELATING TO SPECTRUM
AI can contribute to better utilisation of the available 
frequencies, and thus to high-quality digital 
connectivity. Dynamic spectrum allocation makes it 
possible to allocate certain frequencies to a party in 
(alternating) time frames of a few seconds. For 
example, this will allow a party to meet its basic need 
for connectivity with a regular licence for exclusive 
use and, in times of excess demand, purchase extra 
frequency space. A model is also conceivable in which 
a private party fulfils this role or in which mobile 
operators rent out frequency space to each other. 
Spectrum sharing between parties may also become 
more dynamic with AI and can thus contribute to 
more efficient utilisation.
Companies in the Netherlands 
have access to sufficient 
computing power for effective AI 
applications
Computing power is an important component for many AI 
applications. The computing power (in combination with 
storage) currently available to parties in the Netherlands 
and in Europe may not be sufficient, given the ambitions 
with regard to the application of AI. More and more 
computing power is needed to perform and process 
increasingly complex tasks and extensive research and 
other data – not just for AI applications, but also in 
education and research. In time, developments in the field 
of quantum computing may accelerate AI developments. 
The government will monitor whether the availability of 
computing power is keeping pace with the growing 
demand for it (see also AI research and innovation in the 
Netherlands are of high quality and leading in Europe). 
	ACTION:
• The Netherlands is committed to cooperation 
between the EU Member States in the field of 
research and innovation of High-Performance 
Computing for AI within the Digital Europe 
Programme, which will start in 2021. 
CENTRAL COMPUTING VERSUS EDGE 
COMPUTING
Virtual assistants such as Siri, Google Now or Cortana 
have hardly any computing power in-house : it’s ‘in 
the cloud’ (for example, a computing centre). This is 
known as ‘central computing’. In AI applications that 
use central computing, the networks are important 
because they connect the AI widgets and gadgets to 
the remote computing power. 
In mobile edge computing, the AI application does 
have its own computing power on board to process 
data, or the computing capacity is placed close by in 
the end-user’s access network (for example in the 
providers’ local data centres). One example is a 
self-driving car. Given the need for extremely low 
processing times for the real-time data, sending large 
amounts of data to a central location is not an option. 
A lot of data is therefore processed locally (e.g. sensor 
data about the traffic) and only some data is sent to 
central locations (e.g. for traffic management). The 
cooperation between these components (fixed and 
mobile networks on the one hand, and the Internet of 
Things, AI, robotics, AR and VR on the other) is 
referred to in the market as ‘intelligent connectivity’.
Track 3: Strengthening the foundations
The foundations need to be strengthened in order to be able to to take advantage of the opportunities offered by AI and 
address the risks. In this context, the government is committed to the protection of citizens› fundamental rights and to 
appropriate ethical and legal frameworks. This allows people and companies to maintain trust in AI.49 It is also of 
fundamental importance that markets remain open and competitive, and that national security is safeguarded in the AI 
developments. 
49 See also the ‘Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI’ of the High-Level Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence.
40 | Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence
Track  3 | 
Public values and human 
rights protected Trust
Legal and ethical frameworks
Open, competitive markets
and consumer protection
Competitive markets
Security
Research into responsible AI 
development and application
Intellectual Property
Consumer protection
Actions include:
• Research into the
- legal aspects of decision-
   making algorithms;
- risks of facial recognition 
   technology; 
- European certication of AI 
   applications in the 
   administration of justice.
• Establishing a transparency lab 
for government organisations. 
Actions include:
• Stimulating the participation of 
Dutch companies as well as 
public organisations in the pilot 
phase of the ethical guidelines 
for AI from the High Level Expert 
Group of the European 
Commission. 
Auditable
Actions include:
• Netherlands Research Organisa-
tion NWO’s call for research on 
explainable, socially conscious 
and responsible AI
Actions include:
• The government invests in 
research into the responsible use 
of AI as well as the transparency/ 
explainability of algorithms 
(VWData programme).
Eective supervision
Actions include:
• Research into the supervision of 
algorithms
Actions include:
• The government advocates that 
a European regulator should be 
able to impose ex-ante 
obligations on large digital 
platforms with a gatekeeper 
function o which consumers 
and businesses are heavily 
dependent.
• The Netherlands Authority for 
Consumers and Markets (ACM) 
develops expertise on new 
technologies as well as business 
models and their eects on 
competition analysis.
Actions include:
•The Netherlands has 
accepted the Directive on 
beer enforcement and 
modernisation of EU 
consumer law.
Actions include:
•Implementation of the new 
European Copyright Directive 
amongst others pertaining to 
text and data mining activities.
Actions include:
• Research into the impact of 
the usage of AI on national 
security.
• Research into the use of new 
technologies – including AI – 
for cyber resilience.
Strengthening the foundations
SecurityPublic values and human 
rights protected
Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence | 41
Public values and human rights remain 
protected
Human rights are enshrined in the 
Constitution and in various human rights 
and other treaties and express the public 
values that we consider essential. In its 
response to the research report ‘Algoritmes en 
grondrechten’ (Algorithms and fundamental rights) of 
Utrecht University, the government indicated that the 
importance of human rights and their effective implemen-
tation by the legislator, the government and the courts are 
paramount, and that this is not fundamentally different in 
the digital age.50  
Concrete examples of human rights protection are the 
GDPR, the Equal Treatment Act (Algemene wet gelijke 
behandeling, AWGB) and the Equal Treatment (Men and 
Women) Act (Wet gelijke behandeling van mannen en vrouwen). 
If the government uses AI itself, restricting fundamental 
rights may be necessary and justified under certain 
circumstances. In such cases, however, a legal basis is 
always required which must be sufficiently clear and 
verifiable, serve a legitimate and proportionate purpose, 
provide guarantees against arbitrary use and provide 
adequate legal protection. 
The letter from the Minister for Legal Protection to the 
House of Representatives about the application and use of 
algorithms and artificial intelligence in the field of justice 
administration51, and another letter from the Minister for 
Legal Protection to the House of Representatives about 
the transparency of algorithms in use by the government, 
have already been published.52 
At the same time as this Strategic Action Plan, the 
government sent a policy letter to the House of 
Representatives on AI, public values and human rights.  
In it, the government describes policy to safeguard public 
values and human rights in AI developments. This is a 
crucial but complex issue. For this reason, the government 
has chosen to devote more attention to it in this letter.  
The same applies to the government’s letter entitled 
‘Waarborgen tegen risico’s van data-analyses’ (Guarantees 
against risks from data analyses), which was also sent to 
the House of Representatives at the same time
50 Parliamentary Paper 26643, No. 601.
51 Parliamentary Paper 34775-VI No. AH.
52 Parliamentary Paper 26643, No. 570.
AI AND PUBLIC VALUES & HUMAN RIGHTS 
Prohibition of discrimination 
The prohibition of discrimination can be violated by 
bias in the underlying data, bias in the algorithm or by 
errors in classification. This could lead, for example, 
to unjustified distinctions being made between men 
and women. 
Protection of privacy 
Privacy may be violated if the processing of personal 
data does not meet the requirements of fairness and 
transparency in the GDPR. Privacy issues play a role in 
areas such as facial recognition technology, big data 
and techniques in which personal data are derived 
from other data. 
Freedom of speech 
In the application of AI, freedom of speech may come 
under pressure. This concerns access to information 
(e.g. personalisation and ordering of search results) 
on the one hand, and the operation of algorithms that 
automatically remove content on the other. 
Human dignity and autonomy 
This includes the risk of dehumanisation and the 
influence of AI on making choices. 
The right to a fair trial 
This right applies, among other things, to automated 
decision-making. If it is not transparent whether, and 
if so which, algorithms have been used to make or 
prepare a decision, or what assumptions and data 
form the basis of this decision, there will be pressure 
on the contestability and substantiation of decisions 
and statements, and on the balance between the 
parties to the proceedings (equality of arms).
. 
42 | Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence
Developments in AI and its application can be fast. It is important, therefore, to look ahead, for example by means of 
research into medium- and long-term developments.
USING AI AGAINST DISCRIMINATION
In the Action Plan on Labour Market Discrimination it has been announced that the Ministry of Social Affairs and 
Employment will tackle discrimination in recruitment and selection. Increasingly, employers and their intermediaries 
use automated tools and algorithms in some or all stages of the recruitment and selection process. As part of the 
Action Plan, the Social Affairs and Employment Inspectorate (Inspectorate SZW) also wants to gain insight into 
these systems and wants to see how they can be supervised effectively in the future. In addition, in 2019 
Inspectorate SZW will itself apply an algorithm (developed by the Netherlands Institute for Human Rights) to all 
vacancy notices from 2018 in order to detect age discrimination in them. It will be examined whether this algorithm 
could be used more often and whether it can possibly be expanded to also trace other forms of discrimination in 
vacancy notices.
  ACTIONS:
• Commissioned by the government, the Scientific Council for Government Policy (Wetenschappelijke Raad voor het 
Regeringsbeleid, WRR) will investigate the impact of AI on public values. 
• Commissioned by the Research and Documentation Centre (Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek- en Documentatiecentrum) 
(part of the Ministry of Justice and Security), Utrecht University has started a research programme under the name 
‘Legal aspects of decision-making algorithms’ (Juridische aspecten van algoritmen die besluiten nemen). This exploratory 
study involves a study of five cases to identify the key opportunities and risks of decision-making algorithms over 
the next five to ten years and how they relate to the existing legal frameworks (and the values that lie behind 
them). The cases to be examined are: the self-driving car, P2P energy markets, judges, ‘doenvermogen’ (self-efficacy) 
and content moderation on platforms.
• On 7 June 2019, the Minister for Legal Protection sent a letter53 to the House of Representatives about the 
protection of horizontal privacy (or ‘social privacy’). The letter contains measures that are partly related to the 
risks that the use of AI may entail for horizontal privacy.
• On behalf of the Minister for Legal Protection, Tilburg University is conducting research into the risks to our 
privacy associated with the use of facial recognition technology and into possible measures to limit these risks. 
This study is expected to be completed by the end of 2019.
• The Minister for Legal Protection is examining the desirability of establishing a system of certification of AI 
applications across all disciplines in the administration of justice, with the certification bodies being accredited by 
a body at EU level. 
• The Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations is setting up a transparency lab for government organisations, 
where knowledge is exchanged and support is provided in the areas of transparency, explainability and 
accountability.
• Together with the Ministry of Justice and Security, Statistics Netherlands (CBS), the Directorate-General for Public 
Works and Water Management (Rijkswaterstaat) and the Association of Netherlands Municipalities (VNG), the 
Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations is mapping out the considerations for government organisations 
that play a role in whether or not algorithms should be made public.
53 Parliamentary Paper 34926, No. 8.
Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence | 43
AI is used in such a way that everyone can 
trust it
The trust of citizens and businesses in AI is necessary for 
the successful development and application of AI. And that 
trust cannot be taken for granted. Research54 shows that 
citizens and businesses see all kinds of opportunities for 
AI, such as strengthening security or improving care, but 
also have many doubts about the admissibility of some AI 
applications, including for personalised ads. When it 
comes to safeguards, there are concerns about privacy, 
about wrong decisions being made based on inaccurate 
data, about errors that can no longer be corrected and 
about people who are left out in special circumstances. In 
order to maintain trust in AI, it is crucial that AI is people-
oriented and that it is deployed in such a way that it 
contributes to prosperity and well-being. 
This requires a broad approach in which everyone, 
including people for whom this is not self-evident, feels 
included. First of all, AI must be developed and applied 
within appropriate ethical and legal frameworks. It must 
then be possible to verify how parties have applied AI, 
especially when it comes to high-impact applications. The 
monitoring of compliance with the legal frameworks must 
also be well organised. Here, too, the principle of proporti-
onality is important. And if, despite these safeguards, 
things go wrong and damage occurs, it is important that it 
is clear for whose account the damage is. 
54 Kantar Public, ‘Nederlanders over Artificiële Intelligentie’ (The Dutch on 
Artificial Intelligence), October 2018.
AI applications are developed 
within legal and ethical 
frameworks
In order to guarantee the fundamental rights of citizens as 
described above, these rights have in some cases been 
translated into laws and regulations such as the Equal 
Treatment Act and the GDPR. They can also serve as 
guidelines for formulating ethical frameworks. Alongside a 
national initiative by Netherlands ICT55, the European 
Commission has set up an external AI High-Level Expert 
Group56 that has developed ethical guidelines for AI based 
on seven essential requirements.57 In the first instance, it is 
now up to the market to decide how to implement and 
apply these guidelines. Government, the business 
community and civil society organisations need this to be 
translated this into practice. This is one of the reasons why 
the European Commission launched a pilot phase in June 
2019 for companies and public organisations to explore 
whether the ethical guidelines for AI are workable in 
practice.58 The Commission’s evaluation of the results and 
possible follow-up steps are expected to be completed by 
early 2020. Of course, the market must also comply with 
existing laws and regulations. 
The Netherlands is committed to the development and 
application of responsible AI, which means that the AI 
must benefit people, that fundamental (European) human 
rights are protected and that we strive to ensure that 
everyone is included. As such, the Netherlands is following 
the European approach to responsible people-oriented AI, 
which can be a unique proposition for Europe to profile 
itself internationally.59 The ethical approach to AI should 
strengthen both citizens’ trust in digital development and 
the competitiveness of European AI companies. It is 
important to gain knowledge and experience of this way 
of developing and applying AI. This is one of the reasons 
why the government is encouraging such research. 
55 https://www.nederlandict.nl/ethischecodeai/.
56 High-level group with 52 representatives from science, business and 
civil society.
57 Human influence and supervision, technical robustness and security, 
privacy and data governance, transparency, diversity, non-discrimi-
nation and fairness, ecological well-being and accountability.
58 https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/
ethics-guidelines-trustworthy-ai.
59 In the Council of Europe, the OECD, G20 and UN organisations such 
as UNECE and UNESCO.
44 | Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence
  ACTIONS:
• With the Dutch AI Coalition, the government is 
making efforts to ensure that as many Dutch 
companies and public organisations as possible 
actively participate in the pilot phase of the 
High-Level Expert Group’s ethical guidelines for 
AI.60 The government is also cooperating in cases 
from the government domain (public tasks) and the 
public–private domain (mission-driven approach). 
In the government’s approach to AI, the cases form 
an important part of the realisation of ethically 
responsible AI solutions. This will also build up 
knowledge that will be shared in the public–private 
network to be formed and will challenge the 
business community and knowledge institutions. 
• The Netherlands chairs a working group of the 
European Commission that will issue an Opinion on 
AI and Gender in the spring of 2020.
• The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is investigating 
current regulations in international trade agree-
ments on AI applications and the potential 
adaptations required to protect European values.
The Netherlands conducts more 
research into responsible AI 
development and application
The Netherlands is following the European approach to 
responsible AI and wants European values and standards 
to be embedded in AI applications at an early stage (in the 
design and development phase). However, knowledge 
about this is scarce. This calls for more research, for 
example on design principles, explainability, ethical and 
legal frameworks, validating and explaining models and 
outcomes of algorithms, behaviour, cultural aspects, 
acceptance and trust. 
60 For Nederland ICT, a sector organisation of 600 IT companies, the EU 
ethical guidelines have already served as the basis for their ethical 
code of conduct for the development and use of responsible AI 
applications. In addition, the first party, a Dutch scale-up, has 
already applied to participate in the pilot phase.
  ACTIONS:
• There will be thematic research calls for public-
public collaboration, such as a recent call from the 
Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research 
(NWO), initiated by the Ministry of the Interior and 
Kingdom Relations and worth €2.3 million, on 
explainable, socially aware and responsible AI 
(closing date 5 November 2019). 
• It will be explored how new knowledge from 
fundamental and applied research projects on 
responsible AI can be quickly made available to 
researchers, companies, governments, educational 
institutions and citizens. Finally, the international 
dimension is also relevant here; in the future many 
AI applications will come from outside the European 
Union and may therefore be based on other values.61
AI applications with a high 
impact on people or society 
should be controllable
The government considers it important that the use of AI 
applications by governments and market parties is 
controllable. In many cases, this means that AI applica-
tions must be controllable if they have legal consequences, 
have a major impact on people or society, or if the 
possibilities for human intervention and control are 
limited. People need to be able to trust that AI applications 
are in line with legal frameworks. 
Companies and governments can implement controllable AI 
applications in different ways.62 First of all, it is important 
that people know that a decision has been made with the 
help of AI. The parties can also provide insight into the 
procedures surrounding the deployment of AI: who is 
involved in the development, are the strengths and weak-
nesses known, who can intervene if necessary, who bears 
responsibility for errors and how to challenge the results of 
AI. Another option is ‘technical transparency’, whereby, for 
example, the training data, the model used and the source 
61 On 3 June, the Minister for Foreign Trade and Development 
Cooperation published the Digital Agenda for Foreign Trade and 
Development Cooperation, which also deals with this international 
dimension of AI applications. 
62 The Minister for Legal Protection elaborated on this in his letter on 
the transparency of algorithms in use by the government: 
Parliamentary Paper 26643, No. 570, on the occasion of the motion 
by Verhoeven et al., Parliamentary Paper 32761, No. 117.
Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence | 45
code are made transparent.63 In addition, explainability (in 
understandable language) can be sought, by explaining the 
entire AI system64 or by making specific results understanda-
ble.65 Some AI techniques however, such as black box 
algorithms, are inherently very difficult to explain. Various 
methods are being developed to solve this problem.66 
Companies and governments have a (legal) responsibility 
to provide sufficient insight into the AI applications that 
they use, and the associated procedures. For example, it 
follows from consumer legislation that consumers should 
be able to make an informed choice when purchasing a 
product or service. The GDPR contains transparency and 
disclosure requirements that are primarily intended to 
inform data subjects about the manner in which their 
personal data is processed. If the use of profiling is 
accompanied by automated decision-making, the data 
subject should be made aware of that and useful informa-
tion should be provided on the underlying logic, the 
importance and the expected consequences of such 
processing for the data subject.67 Supervisory authorities, 
such as the Netherlands Authority for Consumers & 
Markets (ACM) or the Dutch Data Protection Authority 
(Dutch DPA), can check in specific cases whether AI 
applications are designed in such a way that they comply 
with statutory regulations. Management bodies are 
subject to information obligations arising from, among 
other things, the general principles of good governance 
and the Dutch Public Access to Government Information 
Act (Wet openbaarheid van bestuur). 
The government welcomes the fact that market players are 
taking their responsibility over and above the existing 
statutory requirements. One of the various initiatives in this 
regard is the appointment of trusted third parties that 
perform audits on algorithms or issue quality marks for 
63 This can enable experts to check the AI and may contribute to wider 
deployment and further development. At the same time, this may 
involve protected trade secrets, the training data may contain legally 
protected personal data and the risk of undue influence must be 
taken into account if third parties also have an insight into the exact 
functioning of AI.
64 This can be done, for example, by using the results of the validation. 
The AI is then fed with slightly modified input, in order to check 
whether this results in logical or illogical changes in outcomes. 
65 For example by means of counterfactual explanations, indicating 
which input should have been different in order to arrive at a 
different outcome.
66 Guidotti, R., Monreale, A., Ruggieri, S., Turini, F., Giannotti, F., & 
Pedreschi, D., ‘A survey of methods for explaining black box models’, 
ACM computing surveys (CSUR), 51(5), 93 2018.
67 The Minister for Legal Protection elaborated on this in his letter on 
the transparency of algorithms in use by the government: 
Parliamentary Paper 26643, No. 570.
responsible AI.68 The government aims to avoid a confusing 
situation with different quality marks by means of uniform 
requirements and consistent application. Internationally 
harmonised standards that reflect European values and 
standards are particularly important in this context. 
If it turns out that companies do not fulfil their own 
responsibilities sufficiently, further legislation could be 
considered to safeguard the interests of society. 
Supplementary transparency or explainability requirements 
may be desirable for specific sectors or applications. Such 
sector-specific regulation, for example, is already in place in 
the financial sector, where various requirements are imposed 
on companies using trading algorithms.69 Furthermore, the 
European regulation on the relationship between platforms 
and businesses, adopted around in the summer period, 
includes an obligation for online platforms and search 
engines to inform businesses about the main parameters 
that determine the ranking of goods and services. 70
 
  ACTIONS:
• Through research calls for PPPs, the national 
government is investing in research into the 
responsible use of AI and the transparency and 
explainability of algorithms, in collaboration with 
the VWData programme (NWA route). 
• The Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy 
is investigating which algorithms are used for 
different sectors, what risks this entails, how 
companies manage these risks and what safe-
guards are in place. 
• The NEN Standards Committee on AI shares good 
practices, develops frameworks for reliable and 
ethically responsible AI applications and contribu-
tes to the development of global AI standards by 
the International Organization for Standardization.
• In the use of algorithms by the government and in 
PPP arrangements, the Ministry of the Interior and 
Kingdom Relations experiments with and encoura-
ges the use of instruments such as the AI Impact 
Assessment and quality marks/audits. 
68 Several private parties are developing such a label or have already 
done so. In addition, an AI Impact Assessment has recently been 
developed by Electronic Commerce Platform Nederland (ECP), with 
the cooperation of the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate 
Policy, among others.
69 This is included in the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive 
(MiFID II). For example, companies are required to carry out an 
annual self-assessment and validation of their algorithmic trading 
activity, and the results of these assessments can be requested by 
supervisory authorities. It must also be possible for a malfunctioning 
algorithm to be disabled by a human being.
70 Regulation (EU) 2019/1150 of the European Parliament and of the 
Council of 20 June 2019 promoting fairness and transparency for 
business users of on-line trade services (OJ EU 2019, L 186)
46 | Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence
  ACTIONS:
• The Inspection Council (Inspectieraad) initiates 
collaboration between supervisory authorities with 
the aim of building up expertise, sharing it and 
discussing the division of tasks with regard to the 
supervision of algorithms and of AI in general.  
The government will investigate whether supervi-
sory authorities are sufficiently equipped to 
supervise algorithms and whether there are any 
persistent blind spots in the supervisory landscape.
In the event of damage, it 
should be clear who is liable
Where a decision is made or actual action is taken with the 
help of AI, questions may arise regarding responsibility 
and liability for damage. In the case of cross-border 
aspects, which are frequent with AI, such liability issues 
can best be considered in a European context.
EXPERT GROUPS ON NEW TECHNOLOGIES 
AND LIABILITY
The European Commission has set up two expert 
groups dealing with new technologies and liability. 
One group is concerned with the Product Liability 
Directive. The European Commission is expected to 
adopt guidelines in mid-2019 on how this directive 
should be interpreted in the case of products 
containing software or equipped with AI, for example. 
The other expert group focuses on new technologies 
and liability in general, including contractual liability. 
This group will report to the European Commission in 
the course of 2019. The findings of these expert 
groups will lead to more insight into liability issues in 
the event of damage caused by AI.
Supervisory authorities use and 
monitor AI applications 
effectively
A major challenge for supervisory authorities is to get a 
grip on the deployment of AI in the areas they supervise. 
The use of AI can make it more difficult to understand 
what exactly is happening in a market. For example, in the 
case of personalised online retail platforms, it is extremely 
hard to prove a structural breach of consumer law. In 
addition, it may become less clear why certain behaviour 
occurs in a market and how it relates to, for example, 
privacy, competition and consumer law. This can make 
effective intervention in a market more difficult. 
However, AI also offers opportunities to organise supervi-
sory authorities’ tasks more efficiently and effectively. For 
example, we can use AI to quickly and automatically detect 
violations, automatically share relevant information with 
the right people, deploy manpower in a more targeted 
manner using risk models, and automate time-consuming 
administrative tasks. 
Supervisory authorities should supervise their respective 
fields on the basis of their own expertise. For example, the 
Health Care and Youth Inspectorate supervises software or 
AI that is used as a medical device and therefore falls 
under the new European Medical Device Regulation 
(MDR), which lays down requirements for software.71 In 
order to take into account the impact of AI in their 
supervision, it is important that supervisory authorities 
jointly consider the impact of AI on their work and field of 
activity and collaborate effectively based on a clear 
division of tasks. The Netherlands Authority for the 
Financial Markets, the Nederlandsche Bank NV and ACM, 
for example, work together in an Innovation Hub that 
companies can turn to with questions about regulation 
and supervision of innovative financial products and 
services. This will help financial institutions clearly identify 
legal boundaries before bringing their innovations to the 
market, giving them maximum scope for experimentation 
without the risk of inadvertent violation of the law. In 
addition, this will give regulators a better understanding 
and grip on innovation within the financial market. 
71 See: https://www.igj.nl/documenten/brochures/2017/12/12/
handreiking-nieuwe-regelgeving-medische-hulpmiddelen-en-in-vitro-
diagnostica. 
Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence | 47
Markets are open, competitive and offer 
good consumer protection 
If the Netherlands wants to become a leader in the field of 
AI, it is important that the development of AI applications 
is financially rewarding. This means first of all that markets 
must be competitive and that it must be possible for AI 
applications to be developed by more than a handful of 
large companies. Competition creates incentives for 
companies to outperform each other by offering ever 
better value for money and more choice. This requires 
both effective competition policy and good consumer 
protection. After all, companies will only have incentives 
to constantly improve their offering if consumers are able 
to make informed choices. In addition, a stable and 
predictable system of intellectual property rights is 
needed, so that companies that come up with innovative 
solutions can also benefit from them. 
Markets for AI applications are 
competitive
Many online platform markets – where AI is applied on a 
large scale – have, through network effects (reinforced by 
data), economies of scale and synergy benefits, a ‘winner-
takes-all’ or ‘winner-takes-most’ tendency.72 In some 
online markets, this can lead to the concentration of 
power on or a few platforms. Once a platform has 
achieved such a powerful position, self-reinforcing 
processes can make it increasingly difficult for other 
platforms to challenge that position. Growth in terms of 
data, computing power and algorithms is easier to achieve 
for large platforms than for new entrants or SMEs. 
Combined with the excellent access to capital and highly 
skilled staff on these platforms, this may lead to a 
situation where a limited number of companies are better 
able to further develop their (already high-quality) AI than 
their competitors. 
72 See also the discussion paper of the Ministry of Economic Affairs and 
Climate Policy: https://www.internetconsultatie.nl/mededinging_platforms 
This may distort competition, for example if an entrant 
with a better but ‘untrained’ algorithm loses out to an 
established player because of an entry barrier such as the 
difference in data positions. Competition issues can also 
arise when a powerful platform can impose unreasonable 
conditions on businesses who want to use their training 
data or algorithms to develop AI applications themselves.73 
This could result in persistent concentration of market 
power. On the other hand, the concentration of users 
around one or a few platforms often leads to efficiency 
gains and innovation opportunities. It is important, 
therefore, to monitor the balance between efficiency and 
innovation on platforms, on the one hand, and sufficient 
openness about their infrastructure and opportunities for 
competition and subsequent innovation, on the other. 
Another risk is that the increasing use of AI, for example to 
ensure that prices move quickly in line with changing 
market conditions, encourages new types of cartels to 
emerge. AI can be used to implement cartel agreements, 
for instance, and the risk of tacit collusion can increase 
when many companies use the same type of algorithms. 
Indeed, entirely autonomous algorithmic cartels may 
develop in the future. 
When AI leads to new forms of abuse, competition 
lawsuits may take longer. New forms of abuse will be more 
difficult to prove, because in such competition cases there 
are no precedents from previous similar cases on which 
regulators and courts can rely. Such cases require more 
detailed analysis and recourse to the courts is more likely. 
At the same time, in cases such as these fast and effective 
enforcement is all the more important because behaviour 
in online markets, especially when using AI, can be difficult 
to reverse. 
73 This may constitute a so-called gatekeeper position. The govern-
ment argues in favour of new powers for a European supervisor to 
intervene in this respect, as can be read in parliamentary paper 
27879, No. 71.
48 | Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence
  ACTIONS:
• The government advocates that, supplementary to 
competition law, at the very least a European 
regulator should be able to impose ex ante obligati-
ons on large ‘gatekeeper’ platforms on which 
consumers and businesses are heavily dependent.
• At EU level, the government calls for guidelines to 
explain in more detail (in guidelines) how the 
competition rules in the Treaty on the Functioning 
of the European Union and in Sections 6 and 24 of 
the Dutch Competition Act can be applied and 
enforced in the digital economy, with a special 
focus on the role of data, market delineation in 
multi-sided markets and non-monetary prices.
• The government calls for the European thresholds 
for notifying a concentration to be adjusted in such 
a way that all relevant digital concentrations fall 
within the regulator’s scope. 
• The ACM’s dedicated digital competition team, 
consisting of specialist lawyers, economists and 
data scientists, is developing expertise on new 
technologies and business models and their impact 
on competition analysis, including AI-driven 
platforms for legal services and the use of algo-
rithms and app stores. 
Consumer rights must not be 
affected by the application of AI
Everyone must be able to make informed choices when 
purchasing a product or service. The consumer legislation 
designed to guarantee this also applies when AI is used: 
the provider of the product or service remains responsible 
for compliance with this legislation. For example, products 
and services must comply with the descriptions and 
information provided about them. If the AI algorithm 
creates additional expectations on the part of the 
consumer, the provider is responsible for this.
AI and algorithms can hinder consumers’ ability to make a 
conscious, considered and well-informed choice as they 
increase information asymmetry. Through large-scale data 
collection, companies have much more information than 
before about the behaviour of consumers and are 
increasingly aware of which nudges are effective to change 
that behaviour. Consumers, for their part, are less and less 
aware of the influence of AI on the information they 
receive and on their selection process. This can mean that 
certain choices are deliberately kept away from consumers 
and that the process is adapted to consumers’ ingrained 
(unconscious) behavioural patterns. This is problematic if 
it causes the consumer to behave in a way that they would 
not have done if they had made a conscious decision. If 
incorrect information is presented which leads the 
consumer to make a choice which they would not 
otherwise have made, this can already be regarded as an 
unfair commercial practice, even under current 
regulations.
	ACTION: 
• In the spring of 2019, the Netherlands approved the 
directive for better enforcement and modernisation 
of consumer protection rules in the European 
Union (COM(2018)185). Pursuant to this directive, 
consumers should be informed when personalised 
prices have been generated automatically. The 
directive is expected to be adopted in the autumn.
Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence | 49
The Netherlands protects the 
intellectual property of companies 
that develop AI applications
The Netherlands has a solid intellectual property rights 
(IPR) system, as proven by the innovations discovered, 
developed and used in this country. The guarantees 
offered by the IP system in the joint development and 
sharing of knowledge are indispensable for the national 
and international collaboration that makes the 
Netherlands one of the most innovative and competitive 
economies in the world. 
The rapid development of AI raises questions – and 
possibly generates uncertainties – in relation to the IP 
system in roughly two areas. On the one hand, this 
concerns IP protection for AI itself. AI systems are complex 
and consist – in short – of hardware, software and data. 
This raises the following questions, for example: do IP 
rights apply to AI systems? If so, what are these rights? 
Should IP protection be extended to encourage the 
development of AI? On the other hand, questions arise 
about IP protection for creations of AI. AI is able to 
generate creative works and inventions. If a creative work 
or an invention has been realised by or with the help of AI, 
how does that affect the ability to obtain copyrights or 
patent protection? Other relevant questions: who qualifies 
as the owner of such creative works or inventions, and 
should the bar for obtaining copyrights or patents be 
raised when AI becomes a standard tool for authors or 
inventors in a particular field?
Although there is no specific IPR protection for AI, a 
number of IPR, including patents, copyright and rights 
under database law, provide protection to AI components 
to a greater or lesser extent. The protection of trade 
secrets can also play a role here.
  ACTIONS:
• The Netherlands is actively monitoring develop-
ments in IP law and AI, in line with initiatives taken 
in a European or international context. For 
example, the Netherlands welcomes the new 
guidelines regarding the patentability of inventions 
based on AI, published by the European Patent 
Office in October 2018.74
• With the implementation of the new Copyright in 
the Digital Single Market Directive (2019/790), the 
Netherlands will create more legal certainty for 
research organisations (including PPPs) about the 
extent to which they can carry out text and data 
mining activities thanks to a broad exception.
74 https://www.epo.org/law-practice/legal-texts/html/guidelines2018/e/g_
ii_3_3_1.htm
50 | Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence
The safety of citizens, businesses and 
government entities in the Netherlands 
remains protected 
AI technology offers opportunities to 
increase security, but can also have 
(intentional or unintentional) adverse consequences.  
The chapter on exploiting societal opportunities describes 
the opportunities that AI offers for the security domain. 
This section discusses the security risks of AI develop-
ments in more detail. 
The government aims to address the risks of AI in a timely 
manner, without hindering positive social-civil applica-
tions. This requires – at both national and international 
level – a commitment to the timely identification of risks, 
thorough research and threat analyses, security-by-
design, the timely development of countermeasures and, 
where necessary, to increase resilience.75
The increasing use of AI technologies in society is creating 
new types of vulnerabilities and security threats. For 
example, we have to anticipate the major potential impact 
of AI on cybercrime, system hacking and cyber-warfare. 
We must rule out any situation in which the control of 
autonomous systems (e.g. vehicles, logistics systems, vital 
infrastructures) is taken over by a party intent on carrying 
out disruptive actions. Hence, security/cybersecurity by 
design should be the guiding principle for the design and 
development of AI applications and autonomous systems. 
As the security risks of AI applications clearly call for an 
international approach, the subject is also on the agenda 
of international organisations such as the United Nations 
(UN).76 
75 Integrated Foreign and Security Strategy (Geïntegreerde Buitenland- en 
Veiligheidsstrategie) 2018–2022.
76 UN Policy Research Centre, ‘The New Geopolitics of Converging Risks 
- UN and the Prevention in the Era of AI’, 29 April 2019.
Developments in AI can also have consequences for 
national security. Further linking of data and the further 
development of analysis and pattern recognition techni-
ques result in user profiles becoming sharper and more 
comprehensive. In addition, AI-driven developments in 
audio and image manipulation technology are making it 
increasingly easy to produce text and audiovisual material 
that is virtually indistinguishable from real life. Such 
technology can be used, for example, for espionage, 
interference, influencing or manipulation. AI develop-
ments can also affect the economic security of the 
Netherlands. The government considers it important to 
minimise its dependence on ICT systems from countries 
that have been identified as conducting an offensive cyber 
programme against Dutch interests.77 Another point of 
attention is that AI applications such as personal 
assistants, robotics, autonomous systems and Internet-of-
Things products – often controlled by foreign or commer-
cial parties – collect large amounts of data, such as 
environmental characteristics, input data, speech, images, 
behaviour and locations. 
In addition, more collaboration between policy makers 
and scientists will be organised in the security domain in 
the coming period. For example, the General Intelligence 
and Security Service (AIVD) and Delft University of 
Technology have launched a joint research programme to 
increase our understanding of the digital threat to our 
national security, as well as of the technical, organisational 
and institutional ways of dealing with it. In this research 
programme, research questions about cybersecurity in an 
administrative context are studied.
77 Parliamentary Paper 30821, No. 72.
Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence | 51
Cybersecurity 
In the Dutch Cyber Security Agenda, AI is mentioned as a 
technological and societal development that entails both 
opportunities and increased vulnerabilities in the digital 
domain. In the cyber domain, AI technology will lead to 
new methods of attack and new countermeasures. AI 
technologies will make attack systems self-learning and 
less predictable. This development is expressed in 
malware that searches for system vulnerabilities of its own 
accord and is able to adapt its own shape to prevent 
detection. Traditional countermeasures will be increasingly 
ineffective. As a result, AI technology will also play a major 
role in the development of digital security systems, for 
example in automatic source code analysis to recognise 
errors in software, or in the detection of viruses or 
anomalies in networks. For the National Cyber Security 
Centre, new applications of AI are relevant both for 
existing policy and for further explorations. AI can also be 
seen as a relevant theme for the development of cyber 
security knowledge. 
Defence
AI can also have significance for warfare and the protec-
tion of the Dutch territory. The party that has access to the 
most advanced AI is way ahead of the game, as it is able to 
make faster, better decisions. On an international level this 
means a battle between the haves and have-nots. The 
opportunities lie in the areas of decision support, 
intelligence gathering, data analysis and accelerated 
responsiveness in the defence of Dutch territory. In 
addition, AI systems can be used to make military work 
safer and to take over certain tasks, such as identifying 
deviant behaviour with image recognition, so that military 
operators can concentrate on other tasks. As stated in its 
letter of 13 May 2019 to the House of Representatives, the 
government is striving for an international framework of 
standards for the use of new technologies as part of 
weapons systems. Like the previous government, the 
government takes the view that all weapons systems and 
their deployment must meet the requirements of 
international law.78 
78 Parliamentary Paper 34300-X No. 109.
While the development of new weapon systems is nothing 
new, it is important to consider whether the new means 
and methods of warfare are permitted under international 
law. At present, the use of AI in autonomous weapon 
systems is a particular focus of international attention.  
In the UN meeting on autonomous weapons – the 
Convention on Conventional Weapons – there is a 
consensus between the countries that future autonomous 
weapons systems should continue to be subject to 
‘meaningful human control’. This is also recommended by 
the Advisory Council on International Affairs, which is 
updating the AIV/CAVV advisory report ‘Autonomous 
weapon systems: the need for meaningful human control’ 
(Autonome wapensystemen: de noodzaak van betekenisvolle 
menselijke controle). 
  ACTIONS:
• The impact of the use of AI on national security is 
currently being investigated within the framework 
of the National Security Strategy. 
• Commissioned by the Cyber Security Council, 
research is being conducted into the use of new 
technology – including AI – for cyber defence.

Appendices
54 | Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence
Appendix 1: Overview of actions 
Track 1: Capitalising on societal and economic opportunities
AI offers solutions for societal challenges
• In October/November 2019, the Knowledge and Innovation Agendas 2020–2023 will be published for missions and 
key enabling technologies, including AI. These missions are in the areas of security, health and care, agriculture and 
food, energy transition and sustainability. The agendas contain a long-term financial commitment in the form of a 
Knowledge and Innovation Contract.
• Together with other parties, TNO is investing in in-depth knowledge, system development and the development of 
ecosystems and applications for AI, for example for cyber security, care, agriculture and security. The approach is 
multidisciplinary, combining knowledge about technology, behaviour, acceptance and applications.
• Research on the effectiveness of the application of AI for police tasks and the ethical aspects of AI.
• Research into design principles for AI in the legal domain (CWI; Netherlands Organisation for Applied Scientific 
Research (TNO); University of Amsterdam (UvA) and the Dutch Public Prosecution Service).
• The Robotic Autonomous Systems unit of the Ministry of Defence translates developments in the field of robotics 
and autonomous systems into concrete national operations. 
• The Ministry of Defence is developing a vision for AI in which attention will be paid to the use of AI in military 
functions (e.g. command and control, intelligence, protection and logistics). The vision will be published in 2020.
• At the end of 2019, the Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport will issue a new letter to the House of Representatives 
on AI and Big Data in the healthcare sector. 
• The Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport is developing an AI Handbook. 
• The Ministry of Agriculture, Nature and Food Quality, together with the Dutch AI Coalition, will intensify the further 
development of a data infrastructure for arable farming.
The government makes optimal use of AI in the performance of public tasks 
• The national government is enhancing knowledge of AI among civil servants in various ways. Examples include the 
digital course series on AI that is available at the Governmental Academy for Digitalisation and Computerisation of 
the Government (RADIO) for every civil servant in the Netherlands, and attention to AI in the development of 
employees› competences. 
• The government is looking for organisational forms (including PPPs) that will consolidate knowledge within 
government organisations. 
• The Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations and the Netherlands Enterprise Agency are developing an 
implementation toolkit for innovative technologies. This also involves seeking interdisciplinary cooperation with, 
among others, the Chief Information Officers of other government agencies and with contractors. 
• Together with the Association of Netherlands Municipalities (VNG) and the Netherlands Enterprise Agency, the 
Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations organises meetings on experiences in the public domain and AI 
technologies applied there, such as chatbots.
• The government organises expert meetings for various technical disciplines that deal with AI applications on a daily 
basis. These include architects, developers and data scientists from various organisations. 
• Active participation in European public sector initiatives in the framework of the coordinated Action Plan for AI. 
These may take the form, for example, of calls to realise AI example projects.
• In collaboration with other government organisations and the Association of Netherlands Municipalities (VNG), the 
Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations is conducting two experiments with AI in 2019, focusing on ethics in, 
by and for design and the transparency of algorithms. The ambition is to build up a portfolio of example projects, 
which will be shared in the knowledge network. 
• Many government bodies, including the Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment, the Ministry of the Interior and 
Kingdom Relations, the Ministry of Justice and Security and several municipalities, pursue poverty reduction policies. 
Initiatives are combined as much as possible in order to come to high-quality proposals. This involves the early 
identification of potential poverty, which can prevent suffering and high costs. 
• Various government organisations are experimenting with text mining, for example to make it easier to search 
archives (JustID) and council documents (Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations, VNG). The intention is to 
use AI in follow-up projects.
Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence | 55
Track 1: Capitalising on societal and economic opportunities
• Several government organisations are exploring the possibilities of new technologies in procurement, with a focus 
on blockchain and AI. The ‘Sustainable digitalisation of public procurement’ (Duurzame digitalisering van de Rijksinkoop) 
programme focuses on AI. This concerns the purchase of generic services from the government and the systems that 
have been set up for this purpose. 
• Various government agencies, such as the police, the Netherlands Enterprise Agency and ‘P-Direkt’ (the Shared 
Service Centre for HRM of the Dutch government) are developing a chatbot.
• The Ministry of Justice and Security and the Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations have accepted 21 
proposals for feasibility studies in phase 1 of SBIR AI in the public sector; proposals for phase 2 will be accepted in 
2020. A second SBIR with a regional party is being prepared.
• Over the next few years, various government ministries, including the Ministry of Justice and Security and the 
Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations, will take part in Odyssey, the world’s largest hackathon in Groningen, 
in various different tracks. In Odyssey, the business community is challenged to develop initiatives for AI solutions in 
response to specific government needs. 
• In the coming years, ministries will use the various instruments within procurement legislation to promote 
innovation in the market. In addition to SBIR, this also concerns innovation partnerships, market consultation and 
the competitive dialogue. 
AI entrepreneurship is stimulated
• The Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy is increasing access to innovation financing for start-ups 
(AI-related and otherwise) through early-stage financing and the Innovation Credit (Innovatiekrediet), and is facilitating 
access to risk capital for start-ups with the ‘Seed Capital Scheme’, the ‘Dutch Venture Initiative’, the scale-up fund 
and via the Regional Development Agencies (RDAs) (Regionale Ontwikkelingsmaatschappijen, ROMs). 
• In the supplementary agreement concluded between the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy, the 
Ministry of Finance and Invest-NL, AI is included as one of the focus areas for Invest-NL. The Ministry of Economic 
Affairs and Climate Policy and the Ministry of Finance are exploring a change in the tax rules which will make it more 
attractive to pay out in stock options – and thus to work for a start-up or scale-up.
• The Ministry of Justice and Security, the Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment and the Ministry of Economic 
Affairs and Climate Policy are drafting legislation relating to the right of residence for essential employees of 
start-ups and scale-ups. The legislation will enter into force in the summer of 2020.
• The Ministry of Foreign Affairs will appoint six start-up liaison officers to its posts in San Francisco/Los Angeles, New 
York/Boston, Singapore, Berlin, Paris and London by 2020 at the latest. 
• TechLeap.nl (formerly StartupDelta) will organise missions to start-up and technology fairs and prominent tech hubs, 
and start-ups and scale-ups are more closely involved in the trade and innovation missions and ‘Top Sector’ 
missions.
• As of 2019, the government will scale up the ‘Accelerating the digitalisation of SMEs’ (Versnelling digitalisering MKB) 
programme, including five regional SME workshops in which education, the government and the business 
community collaborate.
• In 2019, RDAs will jointly explore how they can specifically stimulate entrepreneurship with AI.
• The Dutch AI Coalition is working out a plan to create more synergy between research, education and organisations. 
• Five regional smart industry hubs and research centres (data value hubs) provide companies, particularly SMEs, with 
up-to-date knowledge, tools and training modules for the responsible use of AI and data. The hubs organise 
workshops for SMEs, issue feasibility vouchers and work with vocational education on the development of digital 
skills.
• In the smart industry approach, the sharing of knowledge and commercialisation of research with respect to AI 
applications will be strengthened.
• TNO connects the Dutch field labs and hubs with the European AI Digital Innovation Network.
• As of 2020, the Chamber of Commerce will be providing SMEs with business-oriented information about AI, based in 
part on best practice examples from the SME Workshops. 
• The ICT research platform improves the visibility of practice-based ICT research in the Netherlands, together with the 
employers’ umbrella organisations VNO-NCW (Confederation of Netherlands Industry and Employers) and MKB-
Nederland (Dutch Federation of Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises), HBO-i, SIA and 50 HBO professors. Target: by 
2020, 200 SMEs will be working with innovative ICT applications, including AI.
56 | Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence
Track 2: Creating the right conditions
AI research and innovation in the Netherlands are of high quality and leading in Europe
• After the summer of 2019, NWO will publish a broad AI research agenda for initiating new research programmes and 
tools and national and international synergy. 
• Ministries are exploring the possibility of investing in an AI programme as part of Action Line 2 of the National 
Science Agenda (Nationale Wetenschapsagenda) in 2020.
• Within the framework of the mission-driven innovation policy, long-term programmes will be set up for the AI key 
enabling technology for innovative knowledge and solutions with and for relevant application areas.
• Based on Dutch strengths such as the AI research labs, a proposal will be developed in 2019 under the auspices of 
the Dutch AI Coalition for an AI knowledge centre in the Netherlands that is a leader in Europe.
• The Ministry of Education, Culture and Science is investing €18 million in the purchase of a national supercomputer 
from SURF. 
• The TO2s79 organise joint workshops on AI topics such as explainability, valorisation of research, and societal impact. 
• Within the context of the interdepartmental programme ‘Strengthening the IT workforce in the civil service’ 
(Versterking HR ICT Rijksdienst) (coordinated by the Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations), a cooperation plan 
will be set up with ICT educators in higher education, in order to boost innovation and the development of the 
national government on specific themes (including AI) by setting up field labs. 
• The Ministry of Defence is having its strategic knowledge partners (TNO, NLR and MARIN) carry out research 
programmes in which AI is developed and applied.
• The ‘Data Science, Artificial Intelligence & Quantum Technology for Military Applications’ knowledge centre is 
developing AI application possibilities for the Ministry of Defence and is collaborating with TNO.
• The Netherlands provides visible involvement in the major initiatives for broad European cooperation on AI, such as: 
the Strategic Research Agenda by BVDA/EURobotics80 (with 300 industrial and academic partners), the establishment 
of a specific AI PPP on behalf of the European Commission, and international academic initiatives, such as CLAIRE 
and ELLIS (European Lab for Learning & Intelligent Systems). 
• The Netherlands will continue its current participation in future European programmes, such as Horizon Europe, 
Digital Europe and EUREKA, including through the Dutch National Contact Point for European programmes and 
innovation missions.
• The Netherlands is strengthening its cooperation with other Member States and European initiatives, including 
through the Holland Innovation Network and economic missions.
• The Netherlands is actively seeking collaboration on AI with other countries within and outside Europe, such as 
Germany, France, Singapore, the US and Belgium. For example, an innovation mission to Singapore will be organised 
at the end of 2019 for collaboration in the field of AI, and in 2020 opportunities will be explored for effective bilateral 
collaboration between the US and the Netherlands in specific AI areas. 
• The Netherlands Foreign Investment Agency (NFIA) has included Artificial Intelligence as a primary focus area in its 
Strategic Action Plan, The Netherlands: Digital Gateway to Europe’ and will focus a substantial part of its acquisition 
activities on it. 
The Netherlands has excellent training opportunities for living with AI and more talent for working with AI
• A scheme that will structurally make more than €200 million available in the form of individual budgets for training 
and development will be presented to the House of Representatives after the summer of 2019. This ‘STAP’ (Labour 
Market Position Stimulus) budget replaces the current tax deduction scheme for training and is accessible to 
everyone up to the state pension age. 
• In order to encourage employers to invest in individual learning budgets, the Ministry of Social Affairs and 
Employment is working with the Ministry of Finance, the Tax and Customs Administration (Belastingdienst), sectors 
and executives to clarify the tax treatment of individual learning and development budgets.
• The Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment is developing a scheme to implement the Wiersma motion, which will 
structurally make €48 million a year available from 2020 to promote a learning culture in SMEs, and the Heerma 
motion, which will make a total of €60 million available over a period of five years to provide additional support to 
the agricultural, hospitality and recreation sectors in order to attract more ‘BBL’ students (students in the ‘work-
based’ VET learning pathway).
79 TO2s are the applied research institutes united in the ‘Federation TO2’. The Federation TO2 consists of Deltares, ECN, Marin, NLR, TNO and 
Wageningen-Research.
80 A partnership of the Big Data Value Association and the European Robotics Association.
Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence | 57
Track 2: Creating the right conditions
• With ‘MKB!dee’, the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy is challenging SMEs to come up with ideas that 
will lead to more investment in training and development of workers. While intended for all SMEs, the scheme 
focuses in particular on the challenges of technical SMEs and digitalisation. It relates to the broad effects of 
digitalisation, not to the ICT sector as such. In 2019, €7.5 million is available. 
• The Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment, the Ministry of Education, Culture and Science and the Ministry of 
Economic Affairs and Climate Policy are carrying out a long-term, action-oriented programme to improve the 
preconditions for Lifelong Development (LLD), including pilots with training and employment help desks 
(leerwerkloketten) in various regions, further flexibilisation of the range of courses on offer and assessment of the 
feasibility of a digital training overview. 
• The Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment and the NWO are investing approximately €3 million in research to 
gain more insight into the impact of digital technologies (such as AI) on work and employment.
• The Regional MBO Investment Fund (Regionaal Investeringsfonds mbo) scheme provides €25 million a year until 2022 
for projects that improve the connection of VET to the labour market, for example if the profession for which they 
offer training changes as a result of AI. 
• The Foundation for Cooperation on Vocational Education, Training and Labour Market (Samenwerkingsorganisatie 
Beroepsonderwijs Bedrijfsleven, SBB) also pays attention to AI for senior secondary vocational education (middelbaar 
beroepsonderwijs, MBO) in the qualification files, where relevant. A recent example of a new qualification that includes 
AI is ‘software developer’. 
• Commissioned by the Minister of Education, Culture and Science (OC&W), the universities have drawn up sectoral 
plans for the STEM, Social Sciences and Humanities sectors. The Ministry of Education, Culture and Science (OC&W) 
will contribute an extra €70 million to this, and the periodic resources for profiling can also be used for this purpose. 
• The Ministry of Education, Culture and Science supports the Education Innovation with ICT Acceleration Plan for all 
higher education institutions (universities of applied sciences and research universities) by making €15 million 
available over four years.81
• In 2019, the Learning Outcomes Experiment (Experiment Leeruitkomsten) will be evaluated, in which higher education 
and the business community experiment with more flexible, tailor-made part-time education for adults, in order to 
enable employees to learn effectively while working. 
• In the summer of 2019, a subsidy scheme will be published to encourage MBO institutions to jointly develop 
innovative and flexible education programmes for workers and jobseekers. 
• The Ministry of Education, Culture and Science is investigating how study programmes can better respond to rapid 
technological developments in the strategic exploration for MBO and the Strategic Agenda for Higher Education and 
Research (publication: autumn 2019). 
• Through the Human Capital Agenda for ICT, the Ministry of Economic Affairs stimulates PPP with the aim to promote 
innovation and knowledge transfer for new technologies in education. This will be kicked off with the course,  
‘AI in a Day’.
• Starting in September 2019, a second batch of candidates will start working in the National Data Science Trainee 
Programme, in order to develop themselves as data scientists, from the interdepartmental programme 
‘Strengthening the IT workforce in the civil service’ (Versterking HR ICT Rijksdienst) (coordinated by the Ministry of the 
Interior and Kingdom Relations).
• The Ministry of Education, Culture and Science, together with skills development researchers, is exploring how digital 
skills can be applied in HBO and MBO.
• In order to stimulate innovation and development in the national government, a study is being carried out in 
collaboration with ICT trainers in higher education into setting up field labs on specific themes, including AI, from the 
interdepartmental programme ‘Strengthening the IT workforce in the civil service’ (Versterking HR ICT Rijksdienst) 
(coordinated by the Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations).
• In the autumn of 2019, the government will review the curriculum for primary and secondary education and include 
digital literacy in it. Legal anchoring is planned for 2021. 
• The government is investigating the possibilities of setting up an AI Lab for education. 
• The Digitalisation Agenda for primary and secondary education82 aims to provide more and better support for 
education in digitalisation issues by the business community in five key areas: innovative capacity, digitally literate 
teachers and pupils, digital learning resources, infrastructure and ethics. 
81 Association of Universities in the Netherlands (VSNU), Netherlands Association of Universities of Applied Sciences (Vereniging Hogescholen) & 
Surf, ‘Versnellingplan Onderwijsinnovatie met ICT’, May 2018.
82 Parliamentary Paper 32034, No. 31
58 | Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence
Track 2: Creating the right conditions
The Netherlands has more usable data for AI applications to improve AI developments
• The Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy is exploring the possibilities of stimulating the use of the FAIR 
principles in the sharing of private data for AI applications.
• The Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations is stimulating the provision of public sector information for re-use, 
for example via data.overheid.nl and through the further development of the API portal developer.overheid.nl. 
• The Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy and the Dutch AI Coalition are organising sector dialogues on 
specific data sharing bottlenecks and needs for AI. The Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations will be 
involved in order to better align supply and demand of public data with the needs of AI applications. 
• The Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy will carry out an inventory of existing examples of solutions for 
data sharing for AI (such as the PHT) and ways to further stimulate data sharing for AI (such as data markets, rewards 
and innovation tools). 
• The European Commission has announced its intention to invest in a Common European Data Space to increase the 
availability of data for AI and other purposes. The Netherlands will make actively contribute to the implementation 
of this initiative on the basis of the Dutch vision. 
The Netherlands is at the forefront of Europe in high-quality digital and intelligent connectivity and computing 
power for effective AI applications
• AI will be included as a point of attention in the elaboration of the actions on innovation in the Digital Connectivity 
Action Plan. 
• The Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy will discuss the possibilities of AI applications in networks with 
the parties involved. 
• The Netherlands is committed to cooperation between the EU Member States in the field of research and innovation 
of High-Performance Computing for AI within the Digital Europe Programme, which will start in 2021. 
Track 3: Strengthening the foundations
Public values and human rights remain protected
• Commissioned by the government, the Scientific Council for Government Policy (Wetenschappelijke Raad voor het 
Regeringsbeleid, WRR) will investigate the impact of AI on public values. 
• Commissioned by the Research and Documentation Centre (Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek- en Documentatiecentrum) (part of 
the Ministry of Justice and Security), Utrecht University has started a research programme under the name ‘Legal aspects 
of decision-making algorithms’ (Juridische aspecten van algoritmen die besluiten nemen). This exploratory study involves a 
study of five cases to identify the key opportunities and risks of decision-making algorithms over the next five to ten 
years and how they relate to the existing legal frameworks (and the values that lie behind them). The cases to be 
examined are: the self-driving car, P2P energy markets, judges, ‘doenvermogen’ (self-efficacy) and content 
moderation on platforms.
• On 7 June 2019, the Minister for Legal Protection sent a letter83 to the House of Representatives about the 
protection of horizontal privacy (or ‘social privacy’). The letter contains measures that are partly related to the risks 
that the use of AI may entail for horizontal privacy.
• On behalf of the Minister for Legal Protection, Tilburg University is conducting research into the risks to our privacy 
associated with the use of facial recognition technology and into possible measures to limit these risks. This study is 
expected to be completed by the end of 2019.
• The Minister for Legal Protection is examining the desirability of establishing a system of certification of AI 
applications across all disciplines in the administration of justice, with the certification bodies being accredited by a 
body at the EU level. 
• The Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations is setting up a transparency lab for government organisations, 
where knowledge is exchanged and support take place in the areas of transparency, explainability and accountability.
• Together with the Ministry of Justice and Security, Statistics Netherlands (CBS), the Directorate-General for Public 
Works and Water Management (Rijkswaterstaat) and the Association of Netherlands Municipalities (VNG), the 
Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations is mapping out the considerations for government organisations that 
play a role in whether or not algorithms should be made public.
83 Parliamentary Paper 34926, No. 8.
Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence | 59
Track 3: Strengthening the foundations
AI is used in such a way that everyone can trust it
• With the Dutch AI Coalition, the government is making efforts to ensure that as many Dutch companies and public 
organisations as possible actively participate in the pilot phase of the High-Level Expert Group’s ethical guidelines for 
AI. The government is also cooperating in cases from the government domain (public tasks) and the public–private 
domain (mission-driven approach). In the government’s approach to AI, the cases form an important part of the 
realisation of ethically responsible AI solutions. This will also build up knowledge that will be shared in the public-
private network to be formed and will challenge the business community and knowledge institutions. 
• The Netherlands chairs a working group of the European Commission that will issue an Opinion on AI and Gender in 
the spring of 2020.
• The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is investigating current regulations in international trade agreements on AI 
applications and the potential adaptations required to protect European values.
• There will be thematic research calls for public–public collaboration, such as a recent call from the Netherlands 
Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO), initiated by the Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations and worth 
€2.3 million, on explainable, socially aware and responsible AI (closing date 5 November 2019). 
• It will be explored how new knowledge from fundamental and applied research projects on responsible AI can be 
quickly made available to researchers, companies, governments, educational institutions and citizens. Finally, the 
international dimension is also relevant here; in the future many AI applications will come from outside the EU and 
may therefore be based on other values.84
• Through research calls for PPPs, the national government is investing in research into the responsible use of AI and 
the transparency and explainability of algorithms, in collaboration with the VWData programme (NWA route). 
• The Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy is investigating which algorithms are used for different sectors, 
what risks this entails, how companies manage these risks and what safeguards are in place. 
• The NEN Standards Committee on AI shares good practices, develops frameworks for reliable and ethically 
responsible AI applications and contributes to the development of global AI standards by the International 
Organization for Standardization.
• In the use of algorithms by the government and in PPP arrangements, the Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom 
Relations experiments with and encourages the use of instruments such as the AI Impact Assessment and quality 
marks/audits. 
• The Inspection Council (Inspectieraad) is initiating cooperation between supervisory authorities with the aim of 
building up expertise, sharing it and discussing the division of tasks with regard to the supervision of algorithms and 
of AI in general. 
• The government will investigate whether supervisory authorities are sufficiently equipped to supervise algorithms 
and whether there are still blind spots in the supervisory landscape.
Markets are open, competitive and offer good consumer protection
• The government advocates that, supplementary to competition law, at the very least a European regulator should be 
able to impose ex ante obligations on large ‘gatekeeper’ platforms on which consumers and businesses are heavily 
dependent.
• At EU level, the government calls for guidelines to explain in more detail how the competition rules in the Treaty on 
the Functioning of the European Union and in Sections 6 and 24 of the Dutch Competition Act can be applied and 
enforced in the digital economy, with a special focus on the role of data, market delineation in multi-sided markets 
and non-monetary prices.
• The government calls for the European thresholds for notifying a concentration to be adjusted in such a way that all 
relevant digital concentrations fall within the regulator’s scope. 
• The ACM’s dedicated digital competition team, consisting of specialist lawyers, economists and data scientists, is 
developing expertise on new technologies and business models and their impact on competition analysis, including 
AI-driven platforms for legal services and the use of algorithms and app stores. 
• In the spring of 2019, the Netherlands approved the directive for better enforcement and modernisation of 
consumer protection rules in the EU (COM(2018)185). Pursuant to this directive, consumers should be informed 
when personalised prices have been generated automatically. The directive is expected to be adopted in the autumn.
84 On 3 June, Minister for Foreign Trade and Development Cooperation published the Digital Agenda for Foreign Trade and Development 
Cooperation on this international dimension of AI applications, among other things. 
60 | Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence
Track 3: Strengthening the foundations
• The Netherlands is actively monitoring developments in IP law and AI, in line with initiatives taken in a European or 
international context. For example, the Netherlands welcomes the new guidelines regarding the patentability of 
inventions based on AI, published by the European Patent Office in October 2018.85
• With the implementation of the new Copyright in the Digital Single Market Directive (2019/790), the Netherlands will 
create more legal certainty for research organisations (including PPPs) about the extent to which they can carry out 
text and data mining activities thanks to a broad exception.
The safety of citizens, businesses and government entities in the Netherlands remains protected
• The impact of the use of AI on national security is currently being investigated within the framework of the National 
Security Strategy. 
• Commissioned by the Cyber Security Council, research is being conducted into the use of new technology – including 
AI – for cyber defence.
85 https://www.epo.org/law-practice/legal-texts/html/guidelines2018/e/g_ii_3_3_1.htm
Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence | 61
Appendix 2: Financial resources for AI 
Dutch public contributions
The Netherlands invests in fundamental and applied research mainly through instruments with a broad scope, such as 
the PPP allowance scheme, the SME innovation promotion scheme for the Region and Top Sectors (MIT scheme) and the 
Research and Development Promotion Act (WBSO). Within these instruments, no funds are earmarked in advance for 
specific subjects such as AI. In retrospect, it becomes clear how much has been invested in, for example, AI. For example, 
€19 million was recently allocated to fundamental research at six Dutch universities on how AI can strengthen human 
intelligence, including in the healthcare sector (part of the Gravity programme).
The MIT scheme offers SMEs opportunities to finance AI projects. In the 2013-2017 period, the number of AI projects 
increased to approximately 30 with a total contribution from the Ministry of Economic Affairs of €1.9 million. 
Within the WBSO, there is also a strong increase in AI-related projects over the 2014-2018 period. 
In addition, there are specific programmes for research and innovation. For example, the long-term research programme 
for Big Data is operating in a PPP context, with more than 100 companies (Commit2Data) and with a total value of  
€51 million in public funds from the Ministry of Education, Culture and Science/NWO, the Ministry of Economic Affairs 
and Climate Policy and the Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport (plus €18 million in private funds).
It is estimated that the national government’s (basic) funding for AI research and innovation totals approximately  
€45 million a year, including €45 million for AI research and innovation: 
 • €15 million through the ESA international innovation grant scheme for business participation in EU technology 
programmes;
 • The Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy has provided a total of €11 million for TNO, the use of the  
PPP allowance and the use of Regional Development Agencies; 
 • €10 million is available for the Ministry of Defence in AI-related security research by TNO;
 • A total amount of €5 million is available for other departments, including the Ministry of Justice and Security,  
the Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations and the Ministry of Agriculture, Nature and Food Quality;
 • €4 million via the Ministry of Education, Culture and Science and NWO for PPP research.
In addition, the Ministry of Education, Culture and Science is investing €18 million in a new supercomputer for SURF, 
which is a prerequisite for AI-driven research. 
At the beginning of this year, the government set missions for mission-driven innovation policy86 and it has now also 
drawn up its Knowledge and Innovation Agendas (KIAs) for 2020-2023. AI as key enabling technology is part of that.  
The allocation of funds to the KIAs for 2020 and beyond is not yet known and will be effected through a Knowledge and 
Innovation Agreement 2020-2023 (November 2019). 
The government’s 2019 Spring Memorandum earmarked structural additional resources (€10 million per year) for 
long-term innovation programmes in the area of key enabling technologies. As promised during the general consultation 
on innovation of 19 June 2019, your House will be informed annually about the public investments in key technologies.
At the end of 2019, the Minister of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy will present a broad agenda to strengthen 
sustainable earning capacity in the long term. Key enabling technologies such as AI are included. The Ministers of 
Economic Affairs and Climate Policy and of Finance are also investigating the possibility of setting up an investment fund 
to strengthen earning power and are reporting on this to the House of Representatives at the beginning of 2020. 
86 Parliamentary Papers 33009 No. 63, No. 70.
62 | Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence
European funds
The following section discusses the resources available for AI within European programmes. 
Ongoing European research and development programmes for AI
Horizon 2020: A total budget of €600 million is available within the European Horizon 2020 framework programme for 
AI-related activities. Within the Leadership in Enabling and Industrial Technologies (LEIT) ICT programme, for example, 
approximately €300 million in EU support is available for AI excellence centres, AI on demand platforms, AI for manufac-
turing, big data technologies, blockchain, robotics and the Internet of Things. In the other Horizon 2020 work 
programmes on Nanotechnologies, Advanced Materials, Biotechnology and Advanced Manufacturing and Processing 
(NMBP), Space and Societal challenges, approximately €300 million is available for AI research and development (R&D). 
The Erasmus+ exchange programme is also important in this regard.
EUREKA87: 
 • The ITEA cluster programme (software-intensive systems) is already largely focused on AI (perception, advanced user 
interfaces, command/control, deep learning and digital twin). In the ITEA Call 2018, 10 of the 17 labelled projects are 
AI-related. An example is the use of AI for clinical medical applications. 
 • The PENTA programme (micro-electronics) focuses increasingly on AI. Of the fourteen projects labelled in Calls 1-3, five 
are aimed at AI. The number of AI projects in the current Call 4 is increasing. 
Future research for AI through Horizon Europe and Digital Europe 
Europe aims to catch up in the field of research and development for AI and calls on the Member States to do the same.88 
The Netherlands has previously supported this call through the Declaration of Cooperation on AI.
 
For the EU’s next long-term budget (2021–2027), the EU has proposed to invest a minimum of €7 billion from the new 
European Horizon Europe programme and the Digital Europe Programme in AI. This year, the European Commission will 
present a common Strategic Research and Innovation Agenda for AI (to be launched in 2020). Horizon Europe is 
expected to include the Joint Undertaking Electronics Components and Systems for European Leadership (ECSEL) 2, with 
an increased focus on AI. European industry has indicated that it aims to double the size of the Joint Undertaking. 
EUREKA: The EUREKA cluster programmes ITEA (software-intensive systems) and PENTA (micro-electronics) expire in 
2020 and are expected to be succeeded by new clusters that will focus on AI in a coordinated manner. As part of its 
chairmanship of EUREKA, the Netherlands is endeavouring to realise a review and renewal of the EUREKA cluster 
programmes, with a focus on AI. 
For the co-financing of the participation of Dutch companies and knowledge institutions in strategic, large-scale 
European R&D cooperation programmes via the Joint Technology Initiative (JTI) ECSEL (Horizon 2020) and the EUREKA 
cluster programmes ITEA and PENTA, an amount of approximately €40 million per year is available in national funds.  
The Brussels co-financing amounts to approximately €20 million per year. Through the JTI ECSEL and the EUREKA cluster 
programmes ITEA and PENTA, AI R&D projects with Dutch participation are supported. This means that a total of  
€60 million is available to support the R&D of Dutch companies and knowledge institutions. 
Supplementary to the above-mentioned instruments, other means are being sought to stimulate Dutch R&D activities in 
AI. Dutch industrial companies are currently drafting joint investment proposals for research and innovation in this area. 
This concerns, for example, the participation of Dutch companies and knowledge institutions in related EU (ECSEL 2) and 
EUREKA initiatives. The use of Dutch resources in a tripartite JTI results in European co-financing that is equal to the 
national resources deployed.
87 EUREKA is the European Research Coordination Agency.
88 European Commission, ‘EU Coordinated Plan on AI’, 7 December 2018.
Strategic Action Plan for Artificial Intelligence | 63
Dit is een uitgave van:
Ministerie van Economische Zaken en Klimaat
october 2019 | 122801
