1
AI PORTUGAL 2030
PORTUGUESE NATIONAL 
INITIATIVE ON DIGITAL SKILLS
AI PORTUGAL 
2030
An innovation and growth strategy 
to foster Artificial Intelligence in 
Portugal in the European context


4
AI PORTUGAL 2030
Promoted through the Coordination Office of INCoDe.2030 Initiative in close cooperation with the Portuguese 
Science and Technology Foundation (FCT), The Portuguese Innovation Agency (ANI), Ciência Viva and the 
Portuguese Agency for Administrative Modernisation (AMA).
5
AI PORTUGAL 2030
AI PORTUGAL 
2030 PORTUGUESE NATIONAL 
INITIATIVE ON DIGITAL SKILLS
An innovation and growth strategy to foster Artificial 
Intelligence in Portugal in the European context
AI PORTUGAL 2030
a dynamic and evolutive process
SEPTEMBER 2016
initial preparation 
of INCoDe.2030, 
a national 
initiative to foster 
digital skills
APRIL 2017
formal launching of 
INCoDe.2030, with five 
lines of action: inclusion, 
education, qualification 
for employment, 
specialisation and 
research
7 DECEMBER 2017 
First National 
Forum on 
Digital Skills - 
INCoDe.2030, 
including specific 
sessions on AI
JANUARY 2018
Portugal 
participates actively 
in the preparation 
of the “European 
AI declaration” 
with the EC´s DG 
Connect
JANUARY 2018 
preparatory 
meetings and 
consultations 
for developing 
new research 
activities and 
further developing 
competences in 
AI within Public 
Administration in 
Portugal
FEBRUARY 2018 
Identification and 
launching of four 
pilot R&D projects to 
foster AI within Public 
Administration, in close 
interaction between 
FCT and AMA 
MARCH 2018
launching of “FCT´s Mobilising 
programme to foster AI in the 
public administration”, through a 
competitive call for R&D projects 
promoted by FCT
APRIL 2018
Portugal signs 
the “European AI 
declaration”, during 
the second EU digital 
Day, Brussels
OCTOBER 2018 
presentation of 19 R&D 
projects funded by FCT, 
under the ”FCT´s Mobilising 
programme to foster AI in 
public administration”
OCTOBER 2018
 kick-off for a 
specialised team 
to prepare an AI 
Portugal 2030 strategy 
within the scope of 
INCoDe.2030
6
NOVEMBER 2018
preparatory meetings 
and consultations 
for AI Portugal 2030 
strategy
DECEMBER 12TH, 2018
presentation and 
public discussion 
of a draft version 
of AI Portugal 2030 
strategy in the second 
National Forum on 
Digital Skills  
- INCoDe.2030
JANUARY – FEBRUARY 2019
consultations with different 
entities and business 
enterprises
JANUARY 14TH, 2019
launch of a call within the System 
to Support the Modernisation 
and Capacitation of Public 
Administration (SAMA2020) 
to finance Data Science and 
Artificial Intelligence projects 
within Public Administration
FEBRUARY 1ST, 2019
presentation and expert 
discussion of the AI Portugal 
2030 strategy at Carnegie 
Mellon University, Pittsburg, in 
the context of the Carnegie 
Mellon-Portugal Programme
FEBRUARY 15TH, 2019 
presentation and public 
discussion of the AI Portugal 
2030 strategy at FCUP, 
Porto, with representatives 
of research centres working 
on AI
MARCH 1ST, 2019
“FCT´s Mobilizing 
programme to 
foster AI in public 
administration”, 
through a 
competitive call 
for R&D projects 
promoted by FCT  
– second edition
FEBRUARY 12TH, 2019
presentation and 
public discussion of 
the AI Portugal 2030 
strategy at INL, Braga, 
with EC´s Deputy DG 
Connect
FEBRUARY 25TH, 2019 
presentation and 
public discussion of 
the AI Portugal 2030 
strategy in Porto, 
together with the 
presentation of OECD 
2018 S&T Outlook
7
8
AI PORTUGAL 2030
9
AI PORTUGAL 2030
Foreword     10
Manuel Heitor, Minister of Science, Technology and Higher Education    10
Alípio Jorge, Coordinator of the “AI Portugal 2030” National Strategy    12
Preamble     13
Introduction     16
What is AI?     18
Portugal in Technology and AI Now    19
The Portuguese AI ecosystem    20
A brief digital perspective of the Portuguese Education System    21
AI in the World     22
Vision     24
Detailed Vision     24
Objectives     26
Strategy     27
Actions     29
Areas of specialisation in Portugal with international impact     29
Areas for research and innovation in European and international networks    30
Public administration and its modernisation    34
Inclusion and Education: disseminating generalist knowledge on AI   36
New developments and supporting areas in European and international networks    37
Facing societal challenges brought by AI: Ethics and safety    37
This Document’s Life Cycle     37
CONTENTS
10
AI PORTUGAL 2030
01
FOREWORD
Manuel 
Heitor
Minister 
of Science, 
Technology 
and Higher 
Education
The goal of our “AI Portugal 2030” 
strategy is to foster a collective pro-
cess mobilising citizens at large and 
key stake holders in particular, to-
wards building-up a knowledge in-
tensive labour-market with a strong 
community of forefront companies 
producing and exporting AI tech-
nologies supported by research and 
innovation communities involved in 
excellent high level research. 
In the coming decade, AI technol-
ogies should be easily available to 
promote the efficiency and quality 
of all activities, including SMEs, pub-
lic services, and every citizen. This 
requires qualifying the labour force 
and a guarantee that Portugal will 
be at the forefront of AI Education 
for all. AI will improve the quality of 
services and the efficiency of pro-
cesses while guarantying fairness, 
wellbeing, and quality of life.
AI technologies 
should be easily 
available to promote 
the efficiency 
and quality of all 
activities, including 
SMEs, public services 
and every citizen. 
This requires 
qualifying the 
labour force and 
to guarantee that 
Portugal will be in 
the forefront of AI 
Education for all
11
AI PORTUGAL 2030
This strategy is fully aligned with the 
Coordinated Action plan of the EU 
and their Member States and is in-
cluded in INCoDe.2030, the Portu-
guese initiative to foster digital skills. 
It considers and promotes a coordi-
nated approach at a European lev-
el encouraging the use of this pow-
erful technology to help solve the 
world’s biggest challenges, from 
health to climate, from transport to 
agriculture, and from cybersecurity 
to industry in general.
The current text is the result of a 
long dialogue over the last two 
years and should continously evolve 
as a dynamic and collective effort 
with annual reviews and a system-
atic process of mobilising citizens at 
large, and key stake holders in par-
ticular. The main general objectives 
include added economic growth, sci-
entific excellence, and human devel-
opment increasing dramatically the 
qualifications of the labour force, 
particularly its technological quali-
fications, while promoting inclusion 
and awareness at all levels of edu-
cation. 
But it should be clear that the grow-
ing usage of AI must also strength-
en societal robustness by building a 
ADDED ECONOMIC GROWTH, 
SCIENTIFIC EXCELLENCE AND 
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
clear vision of the impacts of AI in de-
mocracy, privacy, security, fairness, 
the labour market, governmental 
and commercial transparency, 
and equity. Although AI is highly 
disruptive in all these dimensions, it 
also provides, when it is made ethi-
cal-by-design, a set of powerful tools 
to actually improve society and de-
mocracy.
12
AI PORTUGAL 2030
Alípio 
Jorge
Coordinator 
of the “AI 
Portugal 
2030” National 
Strategy
More than two thirds of a century 
ago, Alan Turing, a European, pub-
lished an article with the question 
“Can Machines Think?” where he 
proposed the “Imitation Game”, a test 
that intended to determine wheth-
er or not an artificial agent could 
be considered intelligent. The exact 
term Artificial Intelligence (AI) would 
appear in 1955 branded by McCar-
thy, Minsky, Rochester and Shannon, 
four American pioneers in AI and 
Computer Science. After that, the 
area has developed worldwide to a 
mature scientific field with important 
applications in Robotics, Planning, 
Expert Systems, Natural Language 
and Game Playing. In Portugal, the 
field started to grow in the 80s with a 
few pioneers working in areas such 
as Knowledge Representation, Log-
ic Programming, Machine Learning, 
Natural Language Processing and 
Multi Agent Systems. By that time, we 
had the first Portuguese Conference 
on AI and the launching of the Portu-
guese AI Association. But until recent-
ly, the society and the media saw AI 
mainly as a science fiction must. 
Through the 90s, however, the sce-
nario started to change rapidly due 
It is predicted 
that AI 
technologies 
will have a 
significant 
impact in the 
economic 
growth of the 
developed 
countries and 
of the world as 
a whole in the 
next decade
to the growing flood of data com-
ing from Enterprise Information Sys-
tems, the World Wide Web and the 
enormous spread of sensors in our 
cars, our phones, our gadgets, our 
environments, and our homes. This 
abundance of data combined with 
the ever-growing computational 
power and a strong business innova-
tion landscape gave rise to new ma-
chine learning models, which during 
this decade boosted the whole of AI 
to a golden era. Other developments 
and achievements in autonomous 
vehicles, robotics, game playing and 
natural language understanding 
made the field emerge to a broad 
public recognition. Artificial Intelli-
gence has now reached the econ-
omy in the developed world and 
beyond and is a main asset of big 
and small technological compa-
nies. It is predicted that AI technolo-
gies will have a significant impact in 
the economic growth of the devel-
oped countries and of the world as a 
whole over the next decade. Europe 
has pioneered and excelled in AI and 
technological research, it has strong 
worldwide players and it is definitely 
well positioned to develop and adopt 
AI. However, Europe also faces the 
threat of increasingly depending on 
technology that is not made here. 
The US is leading in many AI do-
mains; China dominates the micro-
chip industry and is investing heavily 
to become the AI world leader by 
2030. Most importantly, the conven-
ience of the widespread adoption of 
AI cannot hinder the human-centred 
European values. Privacy protection, 
safety, transparency, fairness and 
inclusion must be ensured in the Eu-
ropean space. In 2018, the Member 
States of the European Union agreed 
on defining a Coordinated Action 
Plan, which would help shape and 
articulate the national strategies of 
each country, promoting strong AI 
research and innovation and incor-
porating ethical principles by design. 
Portugal, mainly through the Ministry 
of Science, Technology, and Higher 
Education led by Manuel Heitor, and 
the Ministry of Economy led by Pedro 
Siza Vieira, is actively involved in this 
effort. It also naturally articulates with 
the national programme for digital 
skills, INCoDe.2030 coordinated by 
Pedro Guedes de Oliveira. This docu-
ment for the Portuguese AI strategy is 
the result of the first round of discus-
sions made by many representatives 
from Research, Academia, Compa-
nies, and Public Administration. Just 
as the new AI revolution is only be-
ginning, this document is the starting 
point of a strategy that aims to bring 
together AI producers, researchers, 
up-takers, consumers, policy makers 
and the society as a whole in order to 
push Europe and Portugal to a bright 
future. I was the main editor and this 
would not have been possible with-
out the contributions of many who 
suggested, rewrote, reviewed, insert-
ed, underlined and criticised parts of 
it. To all these contributors my per-
sonal acknowledgement.
13
AI PORTUGAL 2030
AI
 S
PE
CIALISTS
TE
C
HN
IC
ALLY QUALIFIELD WORK FO
RC
E
YO
UN
G
 P
O
PU
LA
TION
POPULATION IN
 G
EN
ERAL
INCoDe.2030
ACTION LINES
MAIN ACTORS
RESEARCH
QUALIFICATION
R&D CENTRES AND UNIVERSITIES
HIGHER EDUCATION
IEFP* IAPMEI** INA*** 
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION AND 
OTHER PLAYERS
CCDI* AND MUNICIPALITIES
EDUCATION
INCLUSION
SPECIALISATION
02
PREAMBLE
AI and INCoDe.2030
Following in the footsteps of mass 
digitisation, which has already been 
changing world economy and so-
cietal fabric, AI will accelerate and 
amplify the process. To think ahead 
and prepare action plans in digi-
tal matters is important not only to 
properly handle the pitfalls but also 
to take advantage of the emerging 
opportunities. The impact on peo-
ple´s life and the challenging pace 
of change of technology enhance 
the importance of an AI National 
Strategy that builds on the analysis 
of its developments and applications 
to focus on domain specific ques-
tions such as the AI preparedness 
of Portuguese economic, social, 
and cultural landscape, the role of 
government, and how to involve the 
research community in the entire 
process. However, the setting upon 
which the so-called AI revolution will 
unravel is far larger than an AI Strate-
gy can handle, so INCoDe.2030, in all 
its five action lines, has to prepare the 
ground for its sound implementation.
14
AI PORTUGAL 2030
Inclusion
Digital inclusion aims at providing 
the vast majority of Portuguese 
population with minimum knowl-
edge and skills that will allow for 
them to use the tools available in 
their current life to understand the 
potential benefits that new digital 
and frequently AI based solutions 
can bring to their lives, but also to 
understand the risks and threats 
they have to face, from being 
screened and targeted with false 
information to being driven to op-
tions that are not necessarily in 
their benefit. Moreover, safety and 
privacy are critical issues where an 
acute sense of risk and responsibili-
ty should be achieved.
“Creative Communities for Digital 
Inclusion” (CCDIs) that, under IN-
CoDe.2030, are being developed 
around the country and in close 
cooperation with municipalities 
and other local organisations to 
help vulnerable and digital exclud-
ed communities develop the nec-
essary competences and under-
stand the living context induced 
by the Digital Transformation and 
particularly AI. For some commu-
nities, due to deeper factors of ex-
clusion ranging from age and lack 
of qualifications to ethnical or other 
issues, digital autonomy is hard to 
achieve and can only be reached 
by tailored and networked solutions 
attaining at each cultural environ-
ment counting on mentors and as-
sistants who have to be trained to 
help and assist on a daily basis.
Education
It is very important to contemplate 
an education strategy with an ear-
ly introduction of the fundamental 
concepts of Computer Science 
complemented by Information and 
Communication Technology (ICT) 
learning through its integration in the curriculum of other disciplines. More-
over, given its importance, concepts of AI should also be considered at an 
early stage of schooling. This could be done through examples like
i) teaching young students the fundamentals of machine learning using 
Ciência Viva Clubs located in schools and Science Clubs – already present 
in many places –, taking as examples of challenges current global prob-
lems from biodiversity or pollution studies;
ii) developing creative / collaborative multimedia contents in science, be it 
on key Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics (STEM) subjects 
like human biology and the energy ecosystem, or on Portuguese regions, 
geography, and history, and many other subjects.
iii) developing programming capabilities and leveraging on the high expres-
siveness of programming languages and platforms to create original and 
creative contents.
In this process, students will be able to not only learn how to reason and 
solve problems digitally, but also to create and define new ones drawing on 
their creative capability and critical thinking.
Moreover, young students should understand the risks and threats that 
they face in the same way as the rest of the community aggravated with 
the fact that they spend most of their time immersed in cyberspace with 
the false feeling that since they are “digital natives”, so at ease with technol-
ogy and devices, their – frail and superficial - expertise protects them from 
hazards and attacks.
FOR SOME COMMUNITIES, DUE TO DEEPER EXCLUSION FACTORS 
RANGING FROM AGE AND LACK OF QUALIFICATIONS TO ETHNICAL 
ISSUES OR OTHER, DIGITAL AUTONOMY IS HARD TO ACHIEVE AND 
CAN ONLY BE REACHED BY TAILORED AND NETWORKED SOLUTIONS
15
AI PORTUGAL 2030
PORTUGUESE HIGHER EDUCATION 
SYSTEM HAS BEEN PREPARING 
HIGHLY SKILLED PROFESSIONALS 
IN COMPUTER SCIENCE AND 
ENGINEERING, AS WELL AS IN 
STRONGLY RELATED FIELDS LIKE 
ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONIC 
ENGINEERING, COMMUNICATIONS, 
MATHEMATICS AND PHYSICS
Qualification
AI brings enormous potential for productivity growth from agriculture to 
high-technology services, but it requires a qualified workforce trained to 
identify the best AI opportunities, develop engineering solutions, adapt cur-
rent working environments, and deploy AI applications following safe and 
ethical standards. To this extent, a proper qualification of the workforce in 
ICT in general, and in AI in particular, is fundamental to enable Portuguese 
economic development and sustainability. Over the last couple of years, 
Portugal has become a very attractive place for international high-tech 
companies because of its secure and friendly social fabric as well as the 
technical quality of its workers. Moreover, it has become a fertile environ-
ment for start-ups that have taken an international stand and in various 
cases become first class players. But success has also shown the shortage 
of a qualified workforce and a very strong effort has to be made to over-
come this problem.
The actions to tackle this challenge must take place at various stages: 
i) to extend the professional training of unemployed and active workers 
in ICT and AI, to allow them to be active agents in the application and 
support of AI in various industrial and service sectors. For this purpose, 
private companies or enterprise associations and public institutions 
like IAPMEI1 and IEFP2 must play an important role; 
ii) to improve the quality of public services through a better qualified 
public administration, the responsibility of which relies heavily on INA3;
iii) to re-skill professionals from less employable sectors and up-skill pro-
grammers and engineers through advanced training programmes 
in AI and through a strong involvement of Polytechnic Institutes and 
Universities.  
Specialisation
The Portuguese higher education system has been preparing highly skilled 
professionals in computer science and engineering, as well as in highly 
related fields like electrical and electronic engineering, communications, 
mathematics and physics. The intake of STEM students in Portuguese uni-
versities and polytechnic institutes is higher than the EU average. Moreover, 
more than half of these students pursue their studies to an MSc degree and 
the number of PhD programmes and students in areas related to AI and 
data science have steadily increased over the past decade. 
At the same time, the Lisbon Machine Learning School, an international 
summer course, is almost at its 9th edition while in Porto a similar organisation 
on The Future of Computation will be in its 2nd edition this year, both of which 
aim at researchers and graduate students, computer scientists and industry 
practitioners who desire a more in-depth understanding of these subjects.
The interest in AI, data science and their application and implementation 
in various domains has been growing among students and academic and 
research staff, and the transfer of technology and solutions to industry and 
services is creating a bridge over the so-called “death valley”.
1  IAPMEI – Portuguese Institute for Support to SMEs
2  IEFP – Portuguese Institute for Employment and Professional Training
3  INA – Portuguese Institute for Public Administration
Research
Research on AI, which holds a long 
tradition in Portuguese academ-
ia, should also be intensified as an 
ample domain per se. Today’s 
challenges are very diversified and 
complex, such as for example: 
i) improving learning methodolo-
gies like learning with small data 
sets and through the generali-
sation of outliers;
ii) understanding context con-
necting each statement with 
everything that came before;
iii) understanding causality and, 
being able to differentiate cor-
relation and causality
But also considering ethics, one of 
the most challenging aspects in AI 
today, and building trust through 
data curation in order to avoid bias-
es assuring transparency in the way 
judgements are made promoting 
accountability and explainability.
AI research also induces the de-
velopment of neighbouring areas 
like advanced computing and the 
emergence of new areas like quan-
tum or neuromorphic computing, 
and everything that deals with the 
blend of digital and the physical 
world. New services and industrial 
processes will emerge and they will 
certainly have a role in sustainability.
16
AI PORTUGAL 2030
The global 
outlook is that 
AI will become 
increasingly 
important for 
economic growth 
and development 
at least during the 
next five to ten 
years
03
INTRODUCTION
Artificial Intelligence is already a 
powerful and transformative tech-
nology driving all sorts of changes 
and with a wide-ranging effect in 
different domains from health to 
education, from work and organ-
isational cultures to the environ-
ment. The global outlook is that AI 
will become increasingly important 
for economic growth and develop-
ment at least during the next five to 
ten years. Its promises and potential 
may be harnessed for the social 
common good and for all4, but it 
may also unleash complex risks to 
society. Portugal has an active and 
rapidly growing AI ecosystem, in-
cluding academia, industry and the 
public sector, and must act to fully 
benefit from this revolution. In order 
to be prepared for it, Portugal must 
foster a strong investment in AI at 
national and European terms, mo-
bilise key actors, identify key areas 
4  Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, The European Council, 
the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions 
– Artificial Intelligence for Europe - COM(2018) 237 final, 25.04.2018.
for development and mitigate risks 
for the citizens and society. 
The aim of this document is to set 
the basis of a national strategy for 
the development of the Portuguese 
economy and society through the 
use of Artificial Intelligence in pub-
lic and private activities and the 
consolidation of fundamental and 
applied research on AI. This strate-
gy is fully aligned with the Coordi-
nated Action Plan of the EU and its 
Member States and it is included in 
INCoDe.2030, the Portuguese initia-
tive to foster digital skills. 
In 2018, Europe made a strong 
commitment to strengthen Euro-
pean Research, Development and 
Innovation (R&D&I) in AI in order to 
face an accelerated competition in 
the global market. With this in mind, 
the development of a Coordinated 
Action Plan on Artificial Intelligence 
in Europe has been launched in 
17
AI PORTUGAL 2030
PORTUGAL MUST FOSTER STRONG INVESTMENT IN AI AT 
NATIONAL AND EUROPEAN TERMS, MOBILIZE KEY ACTORS, 
IDENTIFY KEY AREAS FOR DEVELOPMENT AND MITIGATE RISKS 
FOR THE CITIZENS AND THE SOCIETY
It is essential to 
scale up public and 
private investments 
and to mobilise all 
actors concerned 
around common 
strategic interests, 
from research 
and innovation, 
to bringing state-
of-the art AI 
applications into 
the market so 
that the economy 
and the public 
sector uptake 
the foreseeable 
benefits of AI
April 2018 and formally accepted by the Council in December 20185. Rec-
ognising that AI is transforming our world and present challenges and op-
portunities that need to be faced with ambition and by joining forces, the 
Action Plan calls for a coordinated approach at European level encour-
aging the use of this powerful technology to help solve the world’s biggest 
challenges, from health to climate, from transport to agriculture, and from 
cybersecurity to industry in general.
Portugal has joined these efforts from the first preparatory meetings so that 
Europe is at the forefront in investing and developing AI and in exploring 
the opportunities offered by AI. It is essential to scale up public and private 
investments and to mobilise all actors concerned around common stra-
tegic interests, from research and innovation to bringing state-of-the-art 
AI applications into the market so that the economy and the public sector 
uptake the foreseeable benefits of AI. In line with the Declaration signed by 
the EU Member States in April 20186, Portugal wants to rise to the expecta-
tion of this ambitious European approach.  
AI needs an interdisciplinary and collaborative approach. The opacity often 
seen around the implications of AI may be an obstacle for the wider society 
to make sense of it and take part in the dialogue. AI needs to integrate cog-
nitive diversity to foster social inclusion and transformation. Therefore, we 
need a diversity of specialists that will foster different perspectives to better 
solve complex problems. But we also need the whole population to take 
part in the debate and to get involved in designing AI by voicing priorities 
of what AI should address in a human-centred approach. Championing 
diversity, a source of innovation, in AI brings together different forms of col-
lective and distributed intelligence to solve problems7. The value of AI also 
relies on its ability to become democratically distributed. In order to achieve 
this, we need to invest in the creation of mechanisms to store, make avail-
able and distribute data as well as in the development of digital education 
and skills to citizens.
We know that AI will have, and is already having, a strong positive impact 
on Portugal and Europe. Albeit this technology becoming a driver for eco-
nomic growth and, transforming the labour market, industry, and society 
as a whole, we also know that it carries risks that have to be identified and 
5  Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, The European Council, 
the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee, and the Committee of the Regions 
– Coordinated Plan on Artificial Intelligence - COM(2018) 795 final, 7.12.2018.
6  European Commission: https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/eu-member-
states-sign-cooperate-artificial-intelligence
7  Levy, P. (1997) Collective Intelligence: mankind’s emerging world in cyberspace. Cambridge, 
UK: Perseus.
mitigated so that the opportunities 
it brings can be fully reaped. With 
this in mind, Portugal’s AI Strategy 
will be based on the fundamen-
tal principle of not compromising 
the dignity of citizens, strongly an-
chored by the promotion of wellbe-
ing, fairness and quality of life.
Portugal is already active in many 
research, innovation and deploy-
ment projects in the field of AI 
particularly in regard to machine 
learning, multi-agent systems, big 
data, remote sensing, robotics, ad-
vanced analytics, augmented re-
ality, intelligent systems, monitoring, 
simulation, and maintenance to 
name a few applied to automated 
manufacturing, autonomous vehi-
cles, anomaly and fraud detection, 
18
AI PORTUGAL 2030
WE NEED A DIVERSITY OF SPECIALISTS THAT WILL FOSTER 
DIFFERENT PERSPECTIVES TO BETTER SOLVE COMPLEX 
PROBLEMS. BUT WE ALSO NEED THE WHOLE POPULATION 
TO TAKE PART IN THE DEBATE AND TO GET INVOLVED IN 
DESIGNING AI BY VOICING PRIORITIES OF WHAT AI SHOULD 
ADDRESS, IN A HUMAN-CENTRIC APPROACH
Acknowledging 
that people are the 
central element 
of research, 
innovation, 
deployment and 
usage of any AI 
manifestation, the 
outlined AI strategy 
deliberately puts at 
its core action plan 
the empowering 
of people with 
the necessary 
knowledge, skills 
and means to thrive 
in an AI enabled 
world
energy efficiency, critical infrastruc-
tures management, precision agri-
culture, oceans, transport, mobility, 
environment, and health. 
Ultimately, we want to foster the 
impact of AI on transport, agricul-
ture, energy and sustainable ener-
gy systems, aeronautics and space, 
security and industry in general. 
Other areas of the utmost impor-
tance are the blue economy, urban 
development and mobility, Earth 
Observation and biodiversity.
In industry, AI will completely 
change the paradigm of human 
machine interface and the decision 
processes based on several devel-
opments, including robots, to adapt 
to new working environments with 
little to none reprogramming need-
ed and systems with real time con-
trol capabilities.
Acknowledging that people are the 
central element of research, inno-
vation, deployment and usage of 
any AI manifestation, the outlined 
AI strategy deliberately puts at the 
core of its action plan the empow-
ering of people with the necessary 
knowledge, skills and means to 
thrive in an AI enabled world.  
What is AI?
Artificial Intelligence is a broad term 
with a large number of formal and 
informal definitions. For the scope of 
this initiative we refer to AI as the sci-
entific area and the suite of technol-
ogies that use programs and phys-
ical devices to mimic advanced 
facets of human intelligence. AI ar-
tefacts can display abilities such as 
(but not necessarily limited to): au-
tonomy, problem solving, complex 
planning, negotiation, reasoning, 
inference, decision making, diagno-
sis, prediction, monitoring, learning 
from experience, adaptation to new 
situations, language understanding 
and generation, explanation, argu-
mentation, visual/audio recognition, 
object recognition and the gener-
ation of complex artefacts. For this 
strategy, we will focus on emerging 
AI technologies.
19
AI PORTUGAL 2030
04
Portugal is showing good results in 
some innovation indicators (includ-
ing but not limited to AI), although in 
many of them we have been typi-
cally placed below the average of 
the European Union8. Portuguese 
institutions are particularly well po-
sitioned in terms of international re-
search collaborations, broadband 
penetration and product/process in-
novations in Small and Medium-size 
Enterprises (SME). Portugal has been 
relatively successful as an innova-
tion-friendly environment and has 
an attractive research system.  
Human Resources: Numbers 
from 2017 show that Portugal has 
a shortage of qualified human re-
8  “European Innovation Scoreboard 2018” and “Country Report Portugal 2018 
Including an In-Depth Review on the prevention and correction of macroeconomic imbalances”, COMMISSION STAFF WORKING DOCUMENT  
9  Digital economy and digital society statistics at regional level, https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/
sources in advanced technological 
areas, mostly in terms of higher ed-
ucation (67% of the EU average in 
2017) but also in lifelong learning 
(88.8%) and new PhDs (94%). Em-
ployment in knowledge intensive 
activities is low (57% of EU) but it is 
slightly above average in fast-grow-
ing enterprises (103.2%).
Research: Portuguese research has 
a high level of international collabora-
tion (185% of the EU average in 2017) 
participating in the 10% most cited 
works (82.6%) and in the attraction of 
foreign PhD students (98.3%). 
Innovation: The slice of employ-
ment of fast-growing companies 
in the most innovative sectors has 
been improving. The R&D expend-
iture of the business sector has 
considerably improved since 2015 
and represents about 52% of gross 
expenditure in R&D. SMEs are do-
ing quite well in innovations in the 
product or the process (158.8%) 
and in marketing/organisation lev-
els (112%). 
Infrastructure: The best indicator 
of Portugal in the 2018 European In-
novation Scoreboard is broadband 
penetration (200%). Despite us hav-
ing a low level of Internet usage (be-
low 60% of the households in 2017)9 
including e-commerce and internet 
banking with a better performance 
in the use of social networks.
PORTUGAL 
IN TECHNOLOGY 
AND AI NOW
20
AI PORTUGAL 2030
PORTUGUESE 
RESEARCH HAS 
A HIGH LEVEL OF 
INTERNATIONAL 
COLLABORATION
The Portuguese AI ecosystem
Portuguese universities and polytechnic institutes offer a broad range of 
first, second and third cycle degrees in Information Technology. The offer 
of MSc and PhD degrees in AI related topics is also noteworthy and growing 
steadily. However, companies in Portugal report a lack of human resources 
in these areas. The offer in post-graduate conversion courses and focused 
specialisations is limited but growing, most of which are carried out in co-
operation with companies. 
Academia hosts a good number of research centres that have been de-
voted to AI (including robotics) for some decades. Scientific societies have 
been active in the promotion of AI as a scientific and technological field. 
The Portuguese AI Society (APPIA), Robotics Society (SPR) and Pattern 
Recognition Society (APRP) are the most established in the field. Funda-
mental and applied research on AI has been conducted in Portugal since 
at least 1980 and the Portuguese AI community has since built a solid 
world reputation both through researchers working in Portugal as well as 
Portuguese doing AI research abroad. In terms of activity, Portugal ranks 
21st in the world of all-time AI related scientific publications per capita10.
The increased number of new technological companies involved with AI 
has been impressive. Young scale-ups and delegations of European mul-
tinationals have become important in hiring (hundreds of IT and AI spe-
cialists) and development (innovation, collaboration with universities, and 
knowledge-intensive exports). However, a 2018 study conducted by Mi-
crosoft11 reports that only 4% of the universe of 277 relevant companies 
consulted consider themselves to be in a mature stage of AI usage, 61% 
are still planning or in the pilot stage, and 57% of the companies expect AI 
to have a high impact on new business areas.
Collaboration between companies and academia is becoming increasingly 
common, both in terms of collaborative R&D as well as in the recruitment 
flow. However, top companies working in Portugal on AI recognise that they 
have to improve their competence in forging partnerships with Academia.
The Portuguese Public Sector (PPS) comprehends a very large number of en-
tities. In 2018, the scientific funding agency (FCT) supported 19 new projects 
between research units and PPS entities focused on the application of AI to im-
prove public administration. Other initiatives along the same line are prepared 
for 2019 with a tendency to increase the innovation indicators within the PPS.
Collaborative Laboratories (CoLABs) are a new form of partnership be-
tween industry and society for market-driven innovation and skilled job cre-
ation. CoLABs’ main goals are to create qualified and scientific employment 
in Portugal through the implementation of R&I agendas oriented towards 
the creation of economic and social value eliminating the gap between re-
search and innovation activities; reinforcing the collaboration between differ-
ent institutions (public and private) in co-responsibility of knowledge-based 
strategies; combining public based, competitive, and private funding. There 
are currently 21 CoLABs12, some of which have activities related with AI. 
10  Source: www.scopus.com.
11  Artificial Intelligence in Europe: Portugal, Outlook for 2019 and Beyond. Report by Microsoft
12  https://www.fct.pt/apoios/CoLAB/docs/lista_homologada_titulo_de_colab_lote2.pdf 
https://www.fct.pt/apoios/CoLAB/docs/Lista_homologada_titulo_de_CoLAB.pdf
These joint ventures gather aca-
demia, companies and other im-
portant stakeholders.
Portugal has three Digital Innovation 
Hubs (DIHs) already established 
and aims to enlarge the network 
of DIHs. These one-stop-shops 
help companies to become more 
competitive with regard to their 
business/production processes, 
products, and services using digital 
technologies, including AI. DIH are 
one of the most important pillars of 
the Digitise European Industry effort 
as they are composed of the most 
relevant business groups in the re-
spective areas as well as start-ups, 
SMEs and academia in order to en-
sure the broad dissemination and 
transfer of know-how by and to the 
business community. The three DIH 
are Produtech (production technol-
ogies), iMan Norte Hub (manufac-
turing) and HUB4AGRi (agriculture).
21
AI PORTUGAL 2030
The R&D 
expenditure of 
the business 
sector has 
considerably 
improved since 
2015
A brief digital perspective 
of the Portuguese 
Education System 
Portugal has been following an 
ICT strategy in education similar to 
some Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development 
(OECD) countries with a strong in-
vestment in technology and its use. 
The 2015 OECD report on “Stu-
dents, Computers, and Learning: 
Making the Connection” indicates 
that boys are significantly more like-
ly than girls to start using computers 
early. Surprisingly, the report also 
observes that access to computers 
in schools is not a predictor of stu-
dent performance. In fact, students 
who use computers very frequent-
ly at school do a lot worse in most 
learning outcomes, even when 
social background and student 
demographics is considered. The 
study results also show that strong 
investments in ICT for education 
produced no significant improve-
ments in student achievement in 
reading, mathematics, or science. 
Inversely, students with a baseline 
level of proficiency in reading and 
mathematics perform better in dig-
ital competences. This context must 
also take into consideration the fast 
pace of technology change, which 
deprecates technology usage at 
the same rate and increases the 
risk of future adults being left with 
very little useful knowledge after 
several years of education.
According to the same OECD re-
port, Portugal is still below average 
in many relevant Digital Education 
indicators for the preparation of 
youngsters for an AI world, namely 
the number of students who report-
ed the use of computers in Maths 
lessons; differences in early expo-
sure to computers and the Internet 
between boys and girls; the success 
rate on tasks that require the use of 
THE INTRODUCTION 
OF COMPUTER 
SCIENCE CONTENTS 
SUPPORTING 
AI, POSSIBLY 
ARTICULATED WITH 
OTHER DISCIPLINES, 
SHOULD BE WELL 
RECEIVED BY 
STUDENTS
computers to solve problems; per-
formance in digital reading; and the 
index of ICT use at school. 
However, it is noteworthy that Por-
tugal is among the best OECD 
countries in the use of ICT outside of 
school for schoolwork while lagging 
behind OECD average in the use of 
ICT at school, which seems to sup-
port that Portuguese students are 
aware of the importance of ICT in 
education and use it as a common 
tool for study. This also suggests 
that the introduction of Comput-
er Science contents supporting AI, 
possibly articulated with other dis-
ciplines, should be well received by 
students.
22
AI PORTUGAL 2030
05
AI IN THE 
WORLD
AI in the world
The year 2018 was the year AI re-
appeared as a practical and pow-
erful technology with the ability to 
bring a significant added growth 
to the world economy in a short to 
medium term. The burst of com-
prehensive information systems in 
companies in the turn of the 90s, 
the almost simultaneous tremen-
dous growth of the World Wide 
Web and the ubiquitous dissemi-
nation of sensors made available a 
huge quantity and variety of data 
that potentially enabled the auto-
mation of many decisions in line 
with the widening of the impor-
tance of robotics and automation. 
THE EUROPEAN UNION 
SIGNED IN APRIL 2018 
A DECLARATION OF 
COOPERATION AND 
ANNOUNCED THE 
COMMUNICATION OF 
“ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 
FOR EUROPE”
The exponentially increasing com-
puting power and storage capacity 
made a small but visible fraction of 
this endeavour possible. The United 
States has been one of the main 
leaders of this revolution through 
their technological giants and top 
universities. US companies gather 
data from all over the world and 
dominate electronic commerce 
and commodity web services. Chi-
na launches their own AI strategy 
with the aim of being in line with the 
world by 2020 and to lead in some 
AI areas in 2025. They are highly in-
vesting in the development of skills, 
which is a major weakness for the 
Chinese ecosystem, research and 
industrialisation. Chinese protective 
information regulation provided the 
opportunity for their own tech gi-
ants to rise. Canada has been in-
vesting hugely in the research and 
development of skills fostering inno-
vation through university-industry 
collaborations and attracting the 
offices of US tech companies. Can-
ada is also home to some of the 
23
AI PORTUGAL 2030
founders of deep learning, possibly the AI technology that mostly boosted 
the ongoing AI revolution. These researchers have recently won the prestig-
ious Turing Award on account of their scientific contributions. France plans 
to invest 1.5 billion Euros on strengthening the AI ecosystem and developing 
an open data policy. Germany has been home to the Industry 4.0 which 
acknowledges the power of the digital and AI in the development of indus-
try and economy. Finland’s strategy stresses the importance of digital skills 
and human capital for innovation and societal development. Meanwhile, 
many other nations in the world have announced their own view of the 
roads to be taken in this AI revolution.
The European Union signed in April 2018 a declaration of cooperation and 
announced the communication of “Artificial Intelligence for Europe”. The 
High-Level Expert Group was nominated shortly after that. The Group on 
“Digitising European Industry and AI” with representatives from all Member 
States and propelled by DG-Connect promoted several meetings and pro-
duced a “Coordinated Action Plan” in December 2018. The strategies of the 
Member States should be defined by mid-2019.
The burst of 
comprehensive 
information 
systems in 
companies in 
the turn of the 
90’s, the almost 
simultaneous 
tremendous 
growth of the 
World Wide 
Web and the 
ubiquitous 
dissemination of 
sensors made 
available a huge 
quantity and 
variety of data 
that potentially 
enabled the 
automation of 
many decisions 
in line with the 
widening of 
the importance 
of robotics and 
automation
24
AI PORTUGAL 2030
06
VISION 
By 2030, Portugal will have a knowl-
edge intensive labour market with 
a strong community of forefront 
companies producing and export-
ing AI technologies supported by 
an academia involved in high-level, 
fundamental and applied research. 
AI technologies will be easily avail-
able to promote the efficiency and 
quality of all activities, including 
SMEs, public services and every cit-
izen. The labour force will be high-
ly qualified and Portugal will be at 
the forefront of AI Education for all. 
AI will improve the quality of servic-
es and the efficiency of processes 
while guarantying fairness, wellbe-
ing and quality of life.
Detailed Vision
Promoting a better society: AI will improve the quality of services and effi-
ciency of processes while guarantying human dignity as well as wellbe-
ing and quality of life. The economy will grow at a faster pace due to the 
adoption of AI. Important societal problems such as sustainability, resource 
management, and unemployment will be successfully handled using AI 
and data science technologies. Strong ethical guidelines will protect the 
fundamental rights of citizens and our core values.
Fostering AI skills and “digital minds” for all: Portugal will be at the forefront of 
AI Education with every student prepared with Computer Science knowl-
edge capable of leveraging AI general skills as well as promoting specialists 
and attracting AI talent from Portugal and abroad. The Computer Science 
based strategy of AI skills and related skills will spread to earlier stages of 
education and to lifelong learning.
Promoting new jobs and developing an economy of AI services: All compa-
nies and public services will consume AI. A supply chain of AI services will 
bring AI from the research labs to society. Services will be accessible to 
25
AI PORTUGAL 2030
The growing 
application of AI 
by Portuguese 
companies will 
motivate the 
development 
of innovative 
algorithms and 
methodologies, 
and the Portuguese 
AI community will 
participate in the 
development of 
future AI
SMEs through the adoption of AI as 
a service (AI-on-demand). Spe-
cialised companies will be able to 
develop and adapt AI algorithms 
and put them in the national and 
international markets. A data mar-
ket and a model market will flourish 
together with other AI-related di-
rect and indirect markets. Portugal 
will adopt AI technologies at a fast 
pace modernising industry and the 
public sector and competing in the 
global market. 
Fostering Portugal as a living lab for 
the experimentation of new develop-
ments: Portuguese innovative sec-
tors will be promoted as “living labs” 
for new experimentation at a glob-
al level, including in: i) AI for urban 
transformation through sustainable 
cities; ii) AI for sustainable energy 
networks; iii) AI for biodiversity, from 
forests and green economy to ma-
rine species and blue economy; iv) 
AI for autonomous driving; v) AI for 
cybersecurity; and vi) Quantum 
materials for AI; vii) adaptive learn-
ing curricula for students.
Securing AI niche markets through 
key specialised services in Portugal: 
areas of specialisation will be fur-
ther developed, namely: i) Natural 
Language Processing with appli-
cation in automatic translation and 
other automatable services; ii) Real 
time AI with application in secure 
business and financial transactions; 
iii) AI for software development; iv) 
AI for edge-computing.
Contributing to new knowledge and 
developments through AI research 
and innovation: AI knowledge will 
keep evolving rapidly over the next 
decade. The research communi-
ty will strengthen their presence in 
the world through the development 
of edge-cutting research in coop-
eration with the best international 
research teams. The growing appli-
cation of AI by Portuguese compa-
nies will motivate the development 
of innovative algorithms and meth-
odologies, and the Portuguese AI 
community will participate in the 
development of future AI.
Provide better public services for 
citizens and businesses, and adopt 
evidence-based approaches on 
public policies and decision-making 
processes: AI and data science will 
become an important tool to pur-
sue the vision laid out in the 2020 
ICT Strategy changing from a re-
active paradigm to an anticipa-
tory service provision paradigm. At 
the same time, public policies and 
decision-making processes will be 
increasingly supported by evidence 
and not by intuition making use of 
the vast amount of administrative 
data already collected for opera-
tional purposes.
AI WILL IMPROVE 
THE QUALITY OF 
SERVICES AND THE 
EFFICIENCY OF 
PROCESSES, WHILE 
GUARANTYING THE 
HUMAN DIGNITY AS 
WELL AS WELLBEING 
AND QUALITY OF LIFE
26
AI PORTUGAL 2030
The growing application of AI must 
also strengthen societal robustness, by 
building a clear vision of the impacts of AI 
in democracy, privacy, security, fairness, 
the labour market, governmental and 
commercial transparency and equity
Our main general objectives to 
reach by 2030 are the following.
> Added Economic Growth: the add-
ed value brought by AI technologies 
to the economic growth should be 
significant.
> Scientific Excellence: improve the 
front-line position in fundamen-
tal and applied AI research of the 
Portuguese Academia (universities, 
polytechnic schools and research 
institutions) measured in terms of 
publication impact, international 
leaderships, and international col-
laborations. 
> Human Development: Increase dra-
matically the qualifications of the 
labour force, in particular the tech-
nological qualifications, while pro-
moting inclusion and awareness at 
all levels of education. 
In the process we expect to ob-
serve a significant increase in the 
number and volume of knowledge-in-
tensive AI companies displaying a 
considerable R&D effort and in-
creased collaboration between aca-
demia and companies/public sector. 
The awareness of AI capabilities and how it can be used to boost business 
and overall quality of services should spread to the whole of society including 
SMEs, and the public sector, as well as to citizens in their everyday life.
The growing application of AI must also strengthen societal robustness by 
building a clear vision of the impacts of AI on democracy, privacy, security, 
fairness, the labour market, governmental and commercial transparency 
and equity. Although AI is highly disruptive in all these dimensions it also 
provides, if made ethical-by-design, a set of powerful tools to actually im-
prove society and democracy.
07
OBJECTIVES
27
AI PORTUGAL 2030
The 
attractiveness 
of Portugal 
for knowledge 
intensive young 
companies and 
international 
production 
units is high and 
has conditions 
to improve
08
 STRATEGY
The strategy will revolve around four 
main interacting processes.
> The attractiveness of Portugal 
for knowledge intensive young 
companies and international pro-
duction units is high and has the 
conditions for improvement. These 
units work in different sectors but 
have the need for development of 
specialised AI software and high-
tech devices for export in common. 
The collaboration with academia is 
growing in two axes: joint research 
uptake (joint projects and CoLabs) 
and the qualification pipeline.
> The development of this ecosys-
tem will motivate the increase of the 
currently developing innovation lev-
els for a vast number of companies 
and organisations, including start-
ups, SMEs, and the Government 
Sector through business networking 
and by benefiting from the ma-
turing collaboration platforms with 
academia. These include AI-on-
demand pipelines and Digital Inno-
vation Hubs. Expected outcomes 
include an increase in the number 
of patents and the multiplication of 
innovation-based businesses.
> The research potential in AI and 
other areas will grow due to the larger 
share of private investment and be-
cause of the added value induced by 
the challenges brought by innovating 
companies. Moreover, researchers 
will gain insight into the future of AI it-
self as a fundamental scientific field. 
Expected outcomes are a higher at-
traction of research talent (and as a 
consequence of professional talent), 
a higher impact of scientific publica-
tions and an increased ability to join 
international research networks of 
excellence. These scientific results will 
in turn revert back to the productive 
sectors.
> Academia alone and in collabora-
tion with the Industry will increase its 
capacity and develop diferent levels 
of qualification programmes in AI and 
related areas. Other educational insti-
tutions working at different education 
levels will also be motivated to invest in 
skilling, reskilling and lifelong learning 
aiming at tailored qualifications. 
28
AI PORTUGAL 2030
The 
development of 
this ecosystem 
will motivate 
the increase of 
the currently 
developing 
innovation 
levels for a 
vast number of 
companies and 
organizations
ACADEMIA ALONE AND 
IN COLLABORATION 
WITH INDUSTRY WILL 
INCREASE ITS CAPACITY 
AND DEVELOP 
QUALIFICATION 
PROGRAMS OF 
DIFFERENT LEVELS IN AI 
AND RELATED AREAS
As an outcome, Portugal will in-
crease the qualification levels of its 
professionals and increase the level 
of knowledge-intensive employ-
ment.
Each of these four processes will be 
accelerated through the following 
instruments. 
> Innovation funding programmes 
for forefront AI-driven companies 
and for joint uptakes with the re-
search community; 
> Creation of national and interna-
tional sandboxes and testing facil-
ities for the development of cut-
ting-edge technologies;
> Early development of knowl-
edge-transfer platforms (Digital 
Innovation Hubs) that will gradual-
ly be self-sustained as well as the 
consolidation of an infrastructural 
initiative towards full digitalisation of 
the activities; 
> Refinement of the innovation 
voucher instrument;
> Support for application based and 
fundamental research that will be 
multiplied by private funding;
> Support and improvement of 
working conditions for the develop-
ment of qualification programmes; 
> Creation of qualification vouchers; 
> Attraction and retention of talent 
through internationalisation cam-
paigns.
At the same time, it is of the utmost 
importance to ensure our core val-
ues and understand the impacts of 
AI. 
> Define regulatory frameworks 
(also through the creation of regu-
latory sandboxes);
> Define and deploy guidelines for 
ethical-by-design AI through an 
ethical committee for AI and Auto-
mation;
> Spread awareness on AI and 
technology in the entire population 
to promote inclusion;
> Study the impacts of AI on society 
(i.e. employment, democracy, 
and fairness) through focused 
observations and by promoting 
research in the respective scientific 
areas.
29
AI PORTUGAL 2030
Areas of specialisation 
in Portugal with 
international impact
Portugal currently has strong play-
ers in some areas that may serve 
as inspiring examples and help 
drive innovation and research. The 
following list identifies some of these 
areas where Portugal will make a 
specific effort to lead in Europe.
 ACTIONS
09
Natural Language Processing
Portugal has developed an active research community in the area of com-
putational linguistics / natural language processing as well as successful 
companies (i.e. Unbabel and Priberam among others). Independent lan-
guage resources that can be used by the diversity of European and world 
languages and Portuguese in particular should be further promoted. Tex-
tual data is ubiquitous and improving its processing will have a significant 
impact on all domains of application.
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES
> Affirm international leadership in a few key areas, as listed below, by means of joint actions of companies 
and academia leading to innovation, edge-cutting research and involvement in international networks.
> Increase the impact of these areas in the Portuguese economy.
> Identify other emerging research/innovation lines of AI and related technologies.
SPECIFIC ACTIONS
> Foster access to new and sophisticated markets worldwide;
> Enable data and technology sharing for promoting research development and collaboration between 
academia and companies.
> Enable platforms for companies and academia to share best practices.
> Promote the availability of an adequate computing infrastructure.
30
AI PORTUGAL 2030
Real Time decision making with AI 
In many applications, AI algorithms need to respond in real time and au-
tonomously and be able to absorb new data and adjust learned models. 
Data comes in volume and velocity from trading or business transactions, 
from sensors in automobiles or in industrial pipelines, from electrical and 
telecommunications networks, from interactions with the environment, 
from smart city installations, from robots moving in challenging environ-
ments, from cybersecurity installations, and from highly intensive games 
or simulation interactions. Data has to be processed fast, models have to 
adapt fast, and algorithms have to decide promptly and accurately. Por-
tugal has a strong research community in data stream learning and many 
companies have expertise in dealing with this kind of scenario.
AI for Software Development
The effort of software development can be aided by AI. The abstraction 
level of programming can be increased through AI in specific domains 
making coding easier and accessible to a wider audience. Development 
can be faster and automated improving the entire software production li-
fecycle and reducing maintenance costs. This can also be central for the 
dissemination of specific domain skills in software development. This is an 
area where Portugal is already well equipped with a strong offer in rapid 
software development processes and platforms, which must continue to 
improve and innovate through AI.
AI for Edge-computing
Portugal can play an important role 
in the area of Internet of Things (IoT) 
and edge-computing. Industrial 
units produce hardware devices for 
different industries such as automo-
tive, agricultural, and industrial ma-
chines and environments (i.e. for cit-
ies, factories, autonomous vehicles, 
and including current major firms).
Areas for research and 
innovation in European 
and international 
networks
In the area of AI there is relevant in-
vestment of European companies 
in Portugal in several domains, such 
as automotive, car multimedia and 
intermodal transports; information 
systems; components and services 
for 5G networks; smart cities and 
security; banking; and bioeconomy 
and biorefineries. Some outstand-
ing examples with companies, re-
searchers and joint ventures already 
in action are referred hereafter.   
The effort 
of software 
development 
can itself be 
aided by AI. 
The abstraction 
level of 
programming 
can be 
increased 
through AI 
in specific 
domains, 
making coding 
easier and 
accessible to a 
wider audience
31
AI PORTUGAL 2030
AI and urban transformation 
through sustainable Cities
Smart cities will rely more and more 
on AI. Be it in the use of big data, 
software application in all aspects 
of life in the city (i.e. traffic control 
and public safety), or energy effi-
ciency and autonomous vehicles 
and logistics, the city will embed 
AI in order to optimise and adapt 
these technologies to the inherent 
rapid changing environment in a 
complex ecosystem that is a city.
The development of smart cities 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES
> Make AI research have an economic and social impact on all the referred areas with emphasis on the 
subjects mentioned below.
> Have a strong research driven ecosystem of companies, academia, public sector and society including 
start-ups, scale-ups, and established companies.
> Guarantee that AI is safely and ethically applied to the various domains.
> Help companies and regulators find appropriate legal frameworks.
> Identify strategic lines of research that can foster the long-term future of AI.
SPECIFIC ACTIONS
> Identify KPI for AI investment evaluation in Portugal.
> Set up DIHs focusing on AI, working in close collaboration or integrated with the existing sectorial DIH al-
ready in the field and with European DIH (for example the DIH on cybersecurity at Leon or the DIH on IoT in 
Salamanca).
> Set up one or more AI-on-demand platforms linked to other similar efforts in Europe to be made available 
through DIH.
> Promote innovation vouchers and those that facilitate industry-academia cooperation.
> Further promote the participation in the European effort for developing regulation and protocols for an 
Ethical and Secure AI.
> Develop regulatory sandboxes articulated with the EU.
> Foster the collaboration between companies in Portugal and European industrial giants through partici-
pation in European Networks.
> Integrate a strategy of closer cooperation between European AI excellence centres around agendas fixed 
together with industry and based on common knowledge and common challenges for the deployment of 
AI-based solutions in the areas where Europe faces major challenges;
> Engage with international partners in order to align positions and benefit from international cooperation 
in AI, including with Africa, in a variety of areas not forgetting subjects such as standards, ethics and cyber-
security. Informed and concerted actions in AI are required and international cooperation is essential in all 
activities for a responsible and concerted development of AI.
> Reinforce the national structure for funding management.
relies on research, on education 
and skills, on innovation, and on the 
market uptake of new technolo-
gies. AI is fundamental for urban 
transformation and many leading 
projects in Portugal are already 
pursuing these challenges from car 
multimedia to cyber security.  
AI and sustainable energy 
systems
Current debates and trends in en-
ergy, both within Portugal and the 
EU, highlight some significant en-
ergy system challenges. The first 
of these is the need to reverse the 
energy consumption and emission 
trends most nations have seen over 
the past 15 years. Meeting green-
house gas emission targets is a 
challenge that calls for new ideas, 
tools, technologies, and policies.
It is essential to devise strategies 
for meeting these challenges in 
a cost-effectively manner requir-
ing intelligent energy manage-
ment systems as well as new en-
ergy system methodologies that 
capture the dynamics and driver 
32
AI PORTUGAL 2030
demands – including consumer 
behaviour, energy resources (es-
pecially renewable resources), and 
the networks that connect the two. 
It is also of prime importance to en-
gage industry and governments in 
innovative research programmes 
to develop standard approaches, 
methods, and policies for improving 
the long-term performance of the 
energy sector while addressing cli-
mate change and energy security 
concerns.
Digital transformation is reshap-
ing the energy industry with an 
increased use of renewables, resil-
iency issues and sustainability con-
cerns to name a few, where digitisa-
tion and AI enable that change, i.e. 
real time data analytics to improve 
efficiency; distributed generation; 
and sensors. Digital transformation 
together with IoT offers both a short 
and long-term solution to coping 
with varying regulatory and pric-
ing demands of the energy market 
and managing costs, uptime and 
service predictably.
AI, environment and 
biodiversity: from forests and 
green economy to marine 
species and blue economy
AI applied to biodiversity also has 
an enormous potential in Portugal, 
from marine species and healthy 
oceans in a blue economy to forests 
for a green economy for Europe, 
this is a cutting-edge area where 
we want to make a difference.
Intelligent data-driven systems ap-
plied to precision agriculture, re-
mote sensing and Earth Observa-
tion are showing their added value 
in new relevant projects.
In many of these fields, the Atlantic 
International Research Centre (AIR 
Centre) can play a determinant 
role. The AIR Centre is a knowledge 
& data driven long-term multilater-
al platform for scientific and technological cooperation in the Atlantic to-
wards a holistic, integrative and systemic approach to knowledge in space, 
oceans, climate change impacts, energy and data science.  The AIR Centre 
is meant to become a knowledge and data driven network organisation, 
enabling innovative work through bottom-up initiatives that will face new 
and greater challenges and R&D gaps and Innovation. The AIR_DataNet, 
a cross-cutting initiative, is a supercomputing network of facilities and ex-
pertise supporting advanced and complex simulation models of the ocean 
and atmosphere and large sets of data including the Atlantic Data Cube 
and Atlantic GEOSS, two complementary data access tools focused on the 
Atlantic Ocean.
In addition, a new Fraunhofer Portugal Research Centre on precision agri-
culture will soon be operational and will conduct research in this field.
AI, mobility and autonomous driving
Intelligent transport will also open enormous possibilities in AI expertise. The 
ultimate goal is to foster the impact of AI in the industry and transportation 
sector by creating new jobs through introducing real-time itinerary map-
ping based on traffic conditions and autonomous driving capabilities. The 
combination of AI with the increasing communication capabilities of vehi-
cles to interchange information with other vehicles and road and Internet 
infrastructure systems combined with vehicle surrounding perception will 
allow for a fully Intelligent Transport System (ITS) able to improve safety, 
reduce traffic congestions, enhance the experience of drivers, and achieve 
the sustainability of transportation.
AI and cybersecurity 
Cybersecurity is increasingly important in a society with growing preva-
lence of information systems, many of which have AI. An increasing num-
ber of these systems will be in control of critical facilities and infrastructures, 
which provide essential services to all citizens, such as hospitals, power 
plants, water purification and provisioning systems, transport, and integrat-
ed urban management systems. Others will be ubiquitous in smaller units 
such as cars and other vehicles, industrial robots and mobile robotic as-
sistants. Cybersecurity algorithms will require the ability to adapt to new 
kinds of attacks and respond accordingly and autonomously in real time. 
Moreover, AI will minimise the elapsed time between the detection of an 
attack and the system’s corresponding reaction. Nevertheless, AI systems 
can be subject to security attacks giving rise to a new and higher level set 
of autonomous cybersecurity management practices. 
AI APPLIED TO BIODIVERSITY HAS ALSO AN ENORMOUS 
POTENTIAL IN PORTUGAL, FROM MARINE SPECIES AND 
HEALTHY OCEANS IN A BLUE ECONOMY TO FORESTS FOR 
A GREEN ECONOMY FOR EUROPE
33
AI PORTUGAL 2030
AI and health
Ambient Assisted Healthcare can 
benefit enormously from AI and AI ap-
plications. Big data and data sharing 
are essential tools and there is a signif-
icant potential for AI to deliver benefits 
in this sector, such as by discovering 
new drugs, reducing costs, diagnosing 
diseases, improving patient care, per-
sonal medicine and public health.
Ambient Assisted Living (AAL) is one 
specific area where AI can play an 
essential role, particularly in the sup-
port of ageing. AAL Fraunhofer Por-
tugal13 currently materialises itself 
through the Fraunhofer Portugal Re-
search Centre for Assistive Informa-
tion and Communication Solutions 
(AICOS), with consolidated compe-
tences in Human-Centred Design, 
AI and Cyber-Physical Systems.
AI and Industry
Industry 4.0 is an important move-
ment based on the digitalisation of 
industrial processes. AI plays a crucial 
role in the monitoring, maintenance 
and autonomous operation of indus-
trial processes. Portugal has success 
stories in the digitalisation of sectors 
such as the shoe industry. The use of 
AI will enable a much quicker spread 
of efficient management tools for 
industries. A very relevant initiative is 
the Portugal i4.0 program, which has 
been officially launched by the Min-
istry of Economy with the aim of fos-
tering the uptake of technology in the 
Portuguese industry, internationally 
promote Portuguese technological 
companies and attract investment.
Fundamental research 
for the Future AI
Despite the essential importance of 
application areas and domains of 
13  AAL Fraunhofer Portugal: www.fraunhofer.pt.
specialisation, it is fundamental research that enables the necessary open-
ness of horizons that help shape the future of AI. Companies and the Public 
Sector drive the pull of technologies, but academia has the responsibility of 
promoting the push of new ideas and technologies yet to be proven. Many 
fundamental research areas can be listed, some of them already have a tan-
gible scope of application, while others are motivated by true scientific vision.
Important research lines are emerging, such as: Transparent AI: giving algo-
rithms the ability to explain their own decisions and provide a high level and 
adaptive account of their workings to promote fairness and accountability; 
Emotional AI: algorithms will utilise emotions to achieve better decisions; Au-
tonomous AI: important not only in the automotive sector but also in infor-
mation systems, cybersecurity, smart cities, industry, etc.; AutoML: intelligent 
systems that can use machine learning autonomously; Computational Cre-
ativity: producing and creating artistic output is nowadays mostly confined 
to human action. However, there are already good examples, which indi-
cate that machines will have a role to play in the cultural industry as well; 
Computational Ethics: machines that can acquire, learn, discuss and adapt 
moral principles through algorithmic procedures.
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES
> To promote the excellence of fundamental science.
> To increase the impact of Portuguese research on AI.
> To increase the number of ERC grants on AI brought to Portugal by 
candidates working in Portugal.
> To take new technologies for the industry and create new industries.
SPECIFIC ACTIONS
> Foster the development of joint projects, ERC grants and networks 
on emergent AI research topics.
> Influence Scientific European Policy towards the definition of chal-
lenging calls for scientific projects.
> Foster the long-term collaboration between companies and aca-
demia through framework-contracts.
> Participate in the European endeavour to develop a network of 
centres of excellence for AI R&D in close cooperation with a wider 
spread of digital innovation hubs to ensure AI takeup;
> Strengthen the participation in the ongoing partnerships between 
the Member States and the EU through joint undertakings such as 
Electronic Comoponent and Systems for European Leadership 
(ECSEL), for electronic components and systems, EuroHPC-JU the 
European High Performance Computing Joint Undertaking (Euro-
HPC-JU), for high-performing computing, and the Quantum Flag-
ship under the Research and Innovation Programme Horizon 2020, 
key to processing big data and sustain further developments in AI;
> Lead and participate in proposals for European cross-border Pro-
jects of Common Interest (energy area). 
34
AI PORTUGAL 2030
Public administration and its modernisation
The programme aims to support R&D activities that contribute to strength-
en scientific and technological competencies to deal with the vast amounts 
of data generated in Public Administration. The goal is to use and combine 
this administrative data with data from other sources to better inform our 
public policies and decision-making processes, which should be increas-
ingly supported by evidence and not by intuition. And, ultimately, to change 
public service provision from a reactive paradigm to an anticipatory par-
adigm.
It will contribute to the appropriation and incorporation of scientific knowl-
edge to support operational decision systems and to enable the produc-
tion of new knowledge with the goal of finding solutions for particular and 
real problems in public entities in order to address relevant issues for citi-
zens in any area of governance. 
Currently 19 R&D projects are being funded through the “FCT´s Mobilising 
programme to foster AI in public administration”: four initial pilot projects 
aim to support already established and mature partnerships between the 
R&D community and public administration; 15 additional projects were se-
lected by an independent scientific panel under a specific call aiming to 
identify and foster new partnerships. A second call promoted by the FCT 
and a dedicated call promoted within the System to Support the Modern-
isation and Capacitation of Public Administration (SAMA2020) will fund 
more projects in 2019. 
These 19 ongoing projects result from the cooperation between scientific 
institutions and entities of the public administration and are being devel-
oped under the innovation axis of INCoDe.2030 (National Digital Compe-
tencies Initiative). They cover several governance areas such as health, 
education, transportation and urban mobility, economic activity and land 
use planning.
Qualification and specialisation
Qualification and Specialisation, two INCoDE axes, are key to the devel-
opment of AI driven innovation and economy in Portugal. To qualify hu-
man resources at different levels (professional courses, bachelors, mas-
ters, post-graduate specialisations, PhD and post-doc) is a challenge for 
a number of different reasons despite the excellent quality of both our in-
stitutions and students. Most importantly, skills are related to ICT in general 
and AI skills in particular, including data science. However, other supporting 
skills will be important as well.
Portugal is increasingly chosen as a setup point by international technolog-
ical companies while national IT firms show a tremendous growth in size 
and number (new ICT companies have doubled per year from 2007 to 
2017). Moreover, non-IT companies hire more and more staff with ICT skills. 
Even though Portugal is close to the European average in terms of digital 
competences (15th in the DESI 2017 Index, Digital Economy and Society Index 
of the European Commission), it needs to reinforce ICT competences.  This 
applies to specialists, who need to be able to make the most of the growing 
availability of jobs in the digital market, but also to the entire human capital, 
increasing for example internet usage levels, which are still worryingly low. 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES
> Make administrative data easier 
for research units and, public 
and private  to access providing 
a secure access and respecting 
personal privacy issues; 
> Continue to foster 
collaboration between public 
sector entities, businesses and 
research units concerning the 
use of AI;
> Promote new and innovative 
solutions for administrative 
simplification, namely under the 
SIMPLEX program;
> Reinforce public sector skills 
and capabilities with respect to 
AI and data science;
> Assure the ethical use of AI in 
public administration;
SPECIFIC ACTIONS
> Develop a National Data 
Infrastructure managed by 
the National Statistics Office 
(INE - Instituto Nacional de 
Estatística), which will constitute 
a centralised repository for 
administrative data;
> Continue to fund collaborative 
projects between the public 
sector and research units 
to develop administrative 
modernisation innovative 
solutions;
> Create a Collaborative 
Laboratory for AI in the Public 
Administration led by a public 
sector organisation;
> Reinforce already existing 
AI and data science skill 
qualification programmes 
within the public sector in 
collaboration with Higher 
Education Institutions;
> Include public sector 
organisations in the ethics 
committee for AI;
35
AI PORTUGAL 2030
Portugal offers a training infrastructure as well as the human potential 
capable of being (re)qualified to meet the demands of employment op-
portunities that are typical of modern societies such as Portugal. However, 
this (re)qualification is a demanding task that requires mobilisation and a 
combination of efforts from different areas of governance and civil society. 
Digital competences are also intrinsically linked to employability - increas-
ing digitalisation in the labour market requires new competences but offers 
a wider range of opportunities. A more skilled active population generates 
more jobs as well as innovative markets and products generating more 
competitive and robust economic activities.
At the same time, the country itself must be an active agent in the global effort 
to produce new scientific computing knowledge and develop the capacity to 
manage and use large amounts of information. This will help ensure a better 
position in Europe and in the world. We cannot wait to find out what the new 
technologies will be; we have to create them and work with them.
Qualification in exploiting AI is, for example, the cornerstone of Industry 
4.0. Both specialisation and research have to deal with advanced AI tech-
niques and solutions mastering them at a theoretical and technological 
level, developing and implementing new solutions in many different areas, 
such as health, space, maritime, industry, agriculture, cities, services and 
mobility, to name a few.
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES
> Increase the overall number of human resources qualified in ICT in general and in AI in particular at the 
different levels of education, including short cycles for initial training and adult training, as well as graduate 
education/specialisation for adults.
> Enable the development of transferable skills in academia to industry through their effective acquisition by 
learners in the former, in close cooperation with companies and the public administration.
> Increase the participation of women in technological areas, namely in ICT in general and AI in particular, 
and thus augment the potential of the human capital.
> Promote the attractiveness of Portugal to foreign talent, including students, researchers and experienced 
professionals, and reduce border obstacles when justified.
> Promote the experimentation of new AI ideas and concepts in Portugal, including forms of cooperation 
among national and international higher education institutions and firms or the public administration.
SPECIFIC ACTIONS
> Develop qualification at the regional level, including higher education institutions and local, public and 
private actors in the form of “Regional/local Networks for Digital Qualification” following the ongoing 
experience in the development of short cycles in Polytechnics, but further promoting adult training 
for reskilling and upskilling actions (i.e. Switch, Acertar o Rumo, Apostar em TI). It should consider the 
development of focused intensive courses for reskilling in close cooperation with companies and the private 
and public sectors;
> Further promote the development of graduate specialisation programmes (MSc and PhD) including 
executive education for adults in close cooperation with firms and the public administration.
> Launch a series of E-Learning courses covering fundamental aspects of AI and specific application domains 
leveraging on the results from Fundação para a Computação Científica Nacional (FCCN)’s project NAU.  
> Foster international AI and ICT talents to come study and/or work in Portugal, including ongoing actions 
through the “Study and research in Portugal” initiative.
PORTUGAL OFFERS 
A TRAINING 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
AS WELL AS THE 
HUMAN POTENTIAL 
CAPABLE OF BEING 
(RE)QUALIFIED TO 
MEET THE DEMANDS 
OF EMPLOYMENT 
OPPORTUNITIES 
TYPICAL 
OF MODERN 
SOCIETIES SUCH AS 
OURS
36
AI PORTUGAL 2030
Inclusion and Education: 
disseminating generalist 
knowledge on AI
Digital Inclusion and Education for 
all is an essential component of 
AI development. More extensive 
knowledge and skills will facilitate an 
adaptation to changes in profes-
sions. Opportunities for expanding 
qualification contents will be inte-
grated in education programmes. 
The aim is to avoid highly special-
ised competence in an excessively 
narrow field. 
Digital Inclusion and Education are 
two main axes of the INCoDe.2030 
working towards securing a prom-
inent place in terms of digital skills 
until the end of the next decade. 
Digital inclusion
Digital Inclusion actions and pro-
jects may consider the develop-
ment of CCDIs taking into account 
progress experience in some Portu-
guese regions within the context of 
INCoDe.2030. Each project needs 
to serve specific purposes in terms 
of local and institutional require-
ments.
Education
Portugal needs to change its digital 
education strategy from the use of 
ICT technology to the understand-
ing of its fundamental Computer 
Science elements. This knowledge 
will empower students to approach 
a wide variety of problems by de-
veloping new digital solutions as 
well as providing the necessary ba-
sis to support the introduction of AI 
contents.
Performing this change in the digital 
education paradigm in schools can 
only be accomplished by a new in-
itiative totally devoted to promoting 
change and new practices among 
teachers in line with the shift from ICT use to Computing competence (i.e. 
motivate new networks, communities of practice, and grassroot organisa-
tions) involving, first and foremost, current ICT teachers, school headmas-
ters, the government, academia and private companies and institutions 
that understand and share the importance of this change and are availa-
ble to support it in different ways. The beginning of such a movement is of 
the utmost importance to prepare future generations for not only dealing 
with but striving in a digital and AI world.
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES
> Use ICT to change digital education.
> Provide the necessary basis for education in AI.
> Disseminate STEM knowledge.
> Promote early acquisition of coding skills.
SPECIFIC ACTIONS
> Organisation of workshops involving National stakeholders (ICT 
teachers, school headmasters, government officials, academia and 
interested private sector organisations) and international experts from 
the different aspects of the project.
> Preparation of support material and digital infrastructure in collab-
oration with Ciência Viva with the help of national and international 
experts and organisations with proven experience: Creation of a com-
puting study program for each level of education integrated with the 
study programs for other subjects; development of classroom mate-
rial: classroom activities, schemes of work and evaluation methodol-
ogies; development of a digital platform for communication with and 
between all stakeholders, namely for the publication and discussion of 
classroom material and activities, national and local events, discussion 
fora, and online (auto)evaluation of teachers and students.
> Specification of an online evaluation platform for students compre-
hending a common corpus of questions and tracking results for ex 
post analysis.
> Promotion of the entire initiative by traditional and digital media. 
> Teaching young students the fundamentals of machine learning rep-
licating actions already under way i.e. in some Ciência Viva schools, 
among others) in schools and in “Science Clubs” (forming trainers that 
replicate the work in progress). 
> Development of creative / collaborative multimedia content on sci-
ence through for example networking actions bringing together schools 
and several Science Clubs for collaborative video creation on key STEM 
(Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) subjects.
> Development of programming/coding capabilities by involving teams 
of academia to develop a platform in which schools and Science Clubs 
can launch their own Coding Fests allowing for more events to be held 
during the year. Students will be able to learn not only how to solve 
problems but also how to create and define problems drawing on their 
creative capability.
37
AI PORTUGAL 2030
10
New developments 
and supporting areas 
in European and 
international networks
Advanced computing: 
supercomputing
Portugal is actively engaged in con-
tributing for an effective European 
strategy on advanced computing. 
We wish to be an active contributor 
to the EuroHPC future ecosystem in 
parallel with our activities in grid and 
distributed computing. For this pur-
pose, we are currently conducting 
the installation of a new supercom-
puter facility optimised  to support 
a large spectrum of relevant critical 
areas such as artificial intelligence, 
deep learning, digital modelling 
and data science, either in close 
association with the development 
of frontier research areas or the 
development of new applications 
and markets in a range of sectors, 
including Atlantic Interactions, En-
ergy systems and services, Earth 
Observation and new space, preci-
sion agriculture and smart farming, 
health systems, and public adminis-
tration and services, among others. 
These would be the driving objec-
tives of the new system. As such, 
we envisage that a multi-platform 
system may be the best option in 
order to accommodate a broad 
range of applications.
Existing facilities are: the Min-
ho Advanced Computing Centre 
(MACC); the recently opened Ad-
vanced Computing Centre of the 
University of Coimbra (UC-LCA) 
and the C4 – Competence Centre 
in Cloud Computing14.
Quantum materials and 
quantum computing
Quantum computing and quan-
tum materials are another chal-
lenge we want to embrace. 
The International Iberian Nano-
technology Laboratory (INL), locat-
ed in Braga, hosts the Quanta Lab 
and the Academic Hub of the IBM 
Q Network. INL is the only Intergov-
ernmental Research Organisation 
in the world within the field of Na-
notechnology with a modern and 
well-equipped laboratory encom-
passing possibilities to study and 
fabricate everything from DNA-
chips to electronics and sensors in 
14  C4 – Competence Centre in Cloud 
Computing: http://c4.ubi.pt
a complete and true interdiscipli-
nary way with capacity to make 
pilot production of proof-of-con-
cepts. Their strong interdisciplinary 
research integrates most scientific 
fields such as physics, electronics, 
biology, mathematics, pharmacy, 
and medicine. AI is a cornerstone of 
the INL R&D Strategy.
Facing societal challenges 
brought by AI: Ethics and 
safety
AI systems will make important 
and critical decisions auton-
omously. Society will demand 
transparency (the ability to ex-
plain the decisions) and audita-
bility (the ability to trace the flow 
of decisions and actions from 
humans to algorithm) in order to 
promote safety and ethical princi-
ples, including privacy protection 
and fairness. We will need best 
practices to assess AI projects in 
terms of risks to safety and ethics 
and mechanisms to detect and 
prevent misuse of advanced AI 
techniques. The legal framework 
will have to be adjusted to deter-
mine liability in conflicts with the 
involvement of AI decision making. 
THIS DOCUMENT’S 
LIFE CYCLE This document’s life cycle
The strategy will be monitored by 
a Committee coordinated by FCT 
(Fundação para a Ciência e Tecno-
logia) and this supporting document 
will be annually reviewed.


40
AI PORTUGAL 2030
PORTUGUESE NATIONAL 
INITIATIVE ON DIGITAL SKILLS
AI PORTUGAL 
2030
An innovation and growth strategy 
to foster Artificial Intelligence in 
Portugal in the European context
