 1 
Action plan for the digital 
transformation of Slovakia for 2019 – 
2022 
 
Action plan for transformation of Slovakia into a successful digital country and 
development of the digital single market  
 
 
 
 2 
 
Table of contents  
Summary ................................................................................................................................................ 3 
Introduction ........................................................................................................................................... 4 
Institutional background to increase the innovative effectiveness of Slovakia, including 
strengthening of the ability to use new digital funds of the EU ....................................................... 4 
Coordination of tasks and activities of the Acton Plan .................................................................. 14 
Implementation of the Action Plan ................................................................................................ 16 
Technologies used in the Action Plan ............................................................................................ 18 
1. We will support digital transformation of schools and education in order to improve the 
quality and preconditions for employments and acquisition of digital skills and competences 
necessary for the digital era ................................................................................................................ 20 
1.1 Education and digital skills .................................................................................................... 20 
1.2 Modernization and opening of the labour market .................................................................. 29 
2. We will set up the basis for modern digital and data economy and for the digital 
transformation of economy in general ............................................................................................... 32 
2.1 Data economy .............................................................................................................................. 32 
2.2 Innovation ecosystem ................................................................................................................... 37 
2.3 Smart mobility .............................................................................................................................. 39 
2.4 Financial innovations (FinTech) ................................................................................................. 43 
3. We will improve abilities of the public administration to innovate and use data for the benefit 
of citizens .............................................................................................................................................. 48 
3.1 Data in the public administration ................................................................................................ 48 
3.2 Innovations in the public administration ..................................................................................... 52 
4. We will support development of artificial intelligence ................................................................. 58 
4.1 research and education in the field of artificial intelligence ....................................................... 58 
4.2 Increase of the economic growth of Slovakia using artificial intelligence .................................. 62 
 
Overview of proposed measures ........................................................................................................... 68 
 
 
  
 3 
Summary  
 
The Action plan for the digital transformation of Slovakia for 2019-2022 (hereinafter as the “Action 
Plan”) is based and directly follows up the 2030 Digital Transformation Strategy for Slovakia 
(hereinafter as the “Strategy”).  
 
The Action Plan includes measures whose implementation can be started in the short-time horizon, i.e. 
from Q3 2019 until the end of 2022. Their funding is bound to the 2014 – 2020 Programming Period. 
Successful implementation of the Action Plan requires a broad political support beyond the time limit 
of the current government administration mandate. 
 
The report on implementation of the Action Plan will be submitted to the Government of the Slovak 
Republic always as of 30 September of 2020, 2021 and 2022. Any future action plans will be prepared 
based on the performance of this Action Plan, as well as based on the global focus and priorities of the 
EU. The entity in charge of the monitoring of performance of different measures and setting of further 
measures for the following periods is the Directorate General for Digital Agenda of the ODPMII.   
 
This unit will perform monitoring of achieving measurable goals of different measures in the digital 
agenda that will be based on the national legislation and relevant standards as well as leading European 
indexes. The unit will set, in cooperation with relevant ministries and, possibly, with the expert public, 
measurable indicators for set goals and the manner of data collection for its evaluation in regular 
intervals. Thus, it will systematically monitor the procedure for designing and implementing measures 
of the Action Plan. Based on results of the monitoring, it will possible to update the plan of 
implementation of the Action Plan.  
 
Measures are broken down to the following strategic areas (strategic goals), in which Slovakia can reach 
significant success in the monitored time horizon. They cover all areas of the vision of the digital 
transformation of Slovakia, i.e. economy, society and education, public administration, territorial 
development and research: 
 
1. We will support the digital transformation of schools and education in order to improve the 
quality and preconditions for employment and acquisition of digital skills and competences 
necessary for the digital era, 
2. We will establish the basis for modern data and digital economy, 
3. We will improve abilities of the public administration to innovate and use the data, 
4. We will support development of artificial intelligence. 
 
Measures of the Action Plan are, based on their nature, divided into three groups: 
 
– Regulation: Definition of concepts, preparation of strategies and proposal of the legislation 
framework. 
– Structure: Structural measures that will make possible to get prepared for the implementation 
in practice and for experimenting, enhancement of the technological capacity and human 
resources, connecting communities. 
– Projects: Implementation of relevant measures in practice by means of projects and initiatives.  
 
In order to carry out effective measures in the aforementioned priority areas, it is necessary, from the 
short-term perspective, to strengthen the institutional background that represents the basis of the 
innovative ecosystem. The proposal results from priority recommendations and commitments of 
European policies or directly from arrangements of Member States. Its ambition is to create or 
strengthen existing institutional background so that Slovakia could effectively use directly managed 
programmes of the EU as well as European structural and investment funds in the 2021-2027 period. 
The success of the Strategy and related Action Plan will, to large extent, depend on effective 
international cooperation and sharing best practices. At the same time, affected Slovak ministries must 
align themselves with it. For the purposes of meeting the goal pursued by the Strategy, it will be 
important for relevant central state administration authorities to have the possibility to adjust their own 
structure and institutional competences.  
 4 
Introduction  
The Action Plan of the digital transformation of Slovakia for 2019 – 2022 implements the 2030 Digital 
Transformation Strategy for Slovakia, covering measures that can be implemented in the short-term 
time horizon, i.e. from September 2019 until the end of 2022. Their funding is bound to the 2014 – 
2020 Programming Period. A successful implementation of measures of the Action Plan requires a broad 
political support beyond the mandate of the current government. 
In the field of innovative technologies and in the process of digital transformation, the period of three 
years is a relatively long period of time. During the three years, there will be, very likely, a change of 
basic starting points, the area of the digital agenda will move forward dramatically and the meaning and 
use of new technologies and their direction will show in full. Therefore, our main intention is to remove 
any obstacles hindering from beneficial and responsible deployment of digital innovations into practice 
in priority areas and create solid preconditions for further development.  
The report on implementation of the Action Plan will be submitted to the Government of the Slovak 
Republic always as of the end of September. And, based on the performance of this Action Plan, as well 
as based on the global focus and priorities of the EU, there will be future action plans prepared resulting 
from adopted and updated Strategy. 
 
The Action Plan has been prepared in accordance with applicable Slovak legislation and different 
measures will respect and comply with the legislation of the Slovak Republic and regulations and 
directives of the European Union (hereinafter only as the “EU”). The Action Plan will, in line with the 
Constitution of the Slovak Republic and all international commitments, respect rights of all citizens of 
the Slovak Republic, including disadvantaged groups and minorities.  
Strategic areas of the digital transformation of Slovakia  
The measures are divided into the following strategic areas (strategic goals), in which Slovakia can 
reach tangible success in the monitored period of time. They cover all aspects of the vision of the digital 
transformation of Slovakia, i.e. economy, society and education, public administration, territorial 
development and science, research and innovations: 
1. We will support digital transformation of schools and education in order to improve the quality 
and chances of employment and acquire digital skills and competences necessary for the digital 
era, 
2. We will create the basis for modern digital and data economy and for the digital transformation 
of the economy in general, 
3. We will improve abilities of the public administration to innovate and use the data for the benefit 
of citizens,  
4. We will support the development of artificial intelligence. 
Institutional background to increase the innovative effectiveness of Slovakia, 
including strengthening of the ability to use new digital funds of the EU  
In order to carry out effective measures in the aforementioned priority areas, it is, in the short-term 
horizon, necessary to strengthen institutional background that constitutes the basis of the innovation 
ecosystem. The proposal results from priority recommendations and obligations of European policies or 
directly from agreements of the Member States. Its ambition is to create or strengthen current 
institutional background so that Slovakia could effectively use directly managed EU programmes 
as well as European Structural and Investment Funds the 2021-2027 period. Specific sources from 
directly managed programmes such as the Connected Europe Facility, Digital Europe Programme and 
Horizon Europe provide Slovakia with unprecedented possibility to receive significant financial 
means. 
From the conceptual viewpoint, there should be, in particular, two levels of state engagement, based 
on its active participation. At the first level, the state will enable controlled setting up of platforms 
 5 
and centres, whose activities will be guided primarily by the private or academic sector. The second 
level will mean direct engagement of the state in the sense of balanced partnership with the private 
or/and academic sector or in the form of leading role of the government if agreed. Both above levels 
should receive systemic support from the government to develop innovations and increase digital 
competitiveness of Slovakia in general. A specific level not explicitly defined in this part concern the 
participative process in the cooperation between the state and various interested entities in defining 
opportunities and challenges of approaching technological trends or other important aspects of the 
digital transformation.  
The chapter about the institutional background is not definite. The action plan introduces more 
institutional measures that are, however, from the viewpoint of their meaning, placed directly in its 
thematic chapters – part Organisation.  
The digital transformation, due to its cross-sectional nature, concerns competences of a whole range of 
ministries, central public administration authorities and other relevant stakeholders. Due to its 
significant overlaps to international and European policies as well as possibilities of funding from the 
Multiannual Financial Framework 2021-2027, an especially important role will be that of the Ministry 
of Foreign and European Affairs as the central state administration authority for foreign policy. The 
Strategy as well as its Action Plan reflect several legislative and strategic documents of the EU, 
including activities concerning the support to innovations. The success of the Strategy and related Action 
Plan will, to large extent, depend on effective international cooperation and sharing best practices. For 
the purposes of the Strategy implementation, it will be necessary for the relevant central state 
administration authorities, which are in charge of different measures, to have the possibility to flexibly 
adjust their own structures as well as institutional scope of competences. However, it is not ambition of 
this Strategy to define particular means of coping with this challenge as approaches of different 
ministries to meeting different objectives can differ. 
 
A Ensuring direct political support to priority areas of the Action Plan   
Description of the 
measure 
Concerned ministries and other central state administration authorities 
will adjust their own structures in order to support meeting prioritized 
areas of the Action Plan in the scope of competences of the institution. 
For the Action Plan to be successful, it is extremely important for the 
concerned ministries to identify themselves with the “ownership” of the 
topic as well as of priorities whose account, if possible, should be under 
direct political management. Concerned units at those ministries will also 
act as the contact points for taking accounts of tasks of the Action Plan. If 
there are more of them, the optimum solution is to specify the shared 
contact point.  
 
Example 1: Ministry of Education, Science, Research and Sport of the 
Slovak Republic, due to the complexity and social importance of 
competences for the digital era, digital skills and the digital transformation 
of education and schools and, for the purposes of cooperation in the 
Digital coalition, will set up a separate unit that will such cross-sectional 
themes in a systemic manner and that will, at the same time, implement 
state policies in this field. Setting up, managing activities and outputs of 
such unit should fall under competences of the political and strategic 
representative of the ministry.   
 
Example 2: Ministry of Finance of the Slovak Republic (MF SR), in 
connection to activities of the Centre for financial innovations, will 
increase its   organisational capacity in the field of financial innovations 
in order to support and promote financial innovations. Its ambition is to 
strengthen the position of the Ministry of Finance of the Slovak Republic 
as the contact point for the field of financial innovations for the public 
administration and business entities and promote Slovakia as the regional 
leader in the field of innovations in the financial market.  
In charge Relevant ministries  
 6 
Deadline / duration / 
measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2019, continuously.  
Main expected output  Adjustment of the organisational structure of the ministry with the overlap 
to political influence  
Source of funding  No direct additional expenditure is expected  
Reference No 
Dependence on other 
AP measures 
No 
For the purposes of supporting the development of digital skills and competences for the needs of 
practice and education, there was, in 2017, the National coalition for digital skills and jobs in the Slovak 
Republic (Digital Coalition) set up based on the initiative of the IT Association of Slovakia and with 
the support of the ODPMII. The Digital Coalition is a successful example of activation across a whole 
range of public, private, academic and civil organisation and institutions in Slovakia in order to improve 
digital skills of citizens. 
B Support to activities of the Digital Coalition 
Description of the 
measure 
It is based on extension of approved measure No. 13 of Chapter 3.3 of the 
Action Plan for Smart Industry in the Slovak Republic. As we perceive the 
Digital Coalition as one of instruments for cooperative implementation of 
goals of the digital transformation of Slovakia, it is in our interest to support 
its activities by setting up a new legal entity, with the participation of the 
government as a founding member and partner to the IT Association of 
Slovakia. A strengthened Digital Coalition could thus take part in 
implementation of national, regional, European and international policies. 
It is expected that the Digital Coalition will be very actively involved also 
in the network of other digital coalitions in EU Member States and it will 
directly apply for support for EU funds, including directly managed 
programmes. 
One of key intentions of the Digital Coalition is to make education in digital 
technologies topical, effective and provide Slovak citizens with the 
opportunity to develop their own digital skills and competences in the 
whole course of their lives to enable them be successful in the labour market 
and use digital technologies for the performance of their work and to ensure 
high quality of their lives. 
Digital Coalition: 
 Mobilizes all of those who assume obligations to provide education and 
re-qualify employees or entrepreneurs in any sector, such as health care, 
agriculture, education, retail, services or manufacturing, 
 Mobilizes experts, organisations and associations active in the field of 
digital skills and jobs focused on education, qualification enhancement 
or requalification of the labour force and enable citizens acquire digital 
skills necessary for their lives, 
 Initiates preparation of a comprehensive national strategy in the field 
of digital skills, 
 Brings best procedures in Europe and worldwide in acquiring digital 
skills for Slovakia, 
 Provides information about available resources to support the 
development of digital skills (European Structural and Investment 
Funds, Erasmus, Youth Employment Initiative, etc.), 
 Takes part in preparation and implementation of state policies in the 
field of digital skills and competences, 
 Takes part in international activities and projects in the in the field of 
digital skills and competences.  
The support to activities should rest in: 
 7 
 Promotion of activities of the Digital Coalition, 
 Financial, material, personnel and structural support to activities of the 
Digital Coalition, 
 Communication with members of the Digital Coalition in order to 
support them in performing their commitments, 
 Updating and revising goals and activities of the Digital Coalition in 
order to adjust its focus and contribution for the needs of the digital 
economy. 
In charge  ODPMII and IT Association of Slovakia in cooperation with the MF SR, 
Ministry of Education, Ministry of Labour as well as members of the Digital 
Coalition 
Deadline / duration / 
measure 
implementation /  
30 September 2019, continuously. The implementation of the measure has 
not reached the expected scope. 
Main expected output  Setting up of the Digital Coalition as legal entity (second level of the state 
participation). Performance of the measure description. 
Source of funding  State budget / EU funds 
Reference Yes. Thematic enhancement is based on the draft regulation on introducing 
the Digital Europe Programme (No. 10167/18+ADD1, ADD2, ADD3). 
Moreover, digital coalitions in Member States will be able to spend funds 
for performance of objectives of public importance from current CEF-
Telekom Programme (Regulation 283/2014).  
Dependence on other 
AP measures 
Yes. See Chapter I.  
 
Slovakia is one of the last four EU Member States (together with Bulgaria, Romania and Malta) that 
have not developed, as of the date of adoption of this Action Plan, a network of support centres called 
Digital Innovation Hubs1 (DIHs). It is such digital innovation hubs that provide a unique opportunity 
to ensure full use of digital technologies in economy and society. Companies, above all small and 
medium enterprises, as well as public sector entities, acquire access to the use of innovative and digital 
technologies, such as application possibilities of artificial intelligence, computing time for high-speed 
computers to increase their competitiveness and, equally, they can receive consultancy about how to 
successfully digitalise their own processes. Therefore, we will support setting up of the network of DIHs 
in Slovak regions with a significant impact on the business sector, public administration as well as the 
academia.  
C Initiating, support to setting up and connecting DIHs in Slovakia 
Description of the 
measure 
It refers to enhancement of approved measure No. 12, chap. 3 of the Smart 
Industry Action Plan.  
 
Based on results of the currently prepared feasibility study, prepare, support 
and connect DIHs that will serve as single point of contact for services that 
will provide industrial companies with access to latest digital solutions, 
most advanced industrial experiments, sets of human and industrial 
competences.  
 
The so called European DIH (EDIH) will coordinate and provide the 
following services from the central level: 
 Networking (connecting supply and demand in the field of 
innovations and connecting Slovak companies to foreign groupings 
dealing with similar issues),  
                                                     
 
1 Digital Innovation hubs are single points of contact that can help companies – in particular small and medium enterprises to improve their 
business, production processes, products and services by means of digital technologies and thus make them prepared for a successful 
implementation of the digital transformation.  
 8 
 Financing (assistance in preparing applications for grants from 
local sources and EU source, assistance in managing projects as 
well as assistance in acquiring risk capital and investors in general), 
 Human resources development (use of the Digital Coalition sources 
and platform).  
 
The European DIH will be surrounded by ecosystem providing testbeds and 
offering particular solutions in the field of digital innovations for the 
industry. In the ecosystem, it will be possible to carry out activities such as 
“test before invest” and innovative projects. If it is possible, also technical 
universities will get involved in the build-up of the EDIH.  
 
To set up EDIH in Slovakia by the end of 2020 in the sense of results of 
currently prepared feasibility study – Prepare rules and measures for 
development of the DIH ecosystem and invite potential partner institutions 
and companies to join.  
Provide coordination of activities of the DIH with activities of the Digital 
Coalition.  
In charge  ODPMII in cooperation with the Ministry of Economy and IT Association 
of Slovakia 
Deadline / duration / 
measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2020, continuously. The implementation of the measure has 
not started yet. 
Main expected output  Setting up the EDIH 
Source of funding  State budget / EU funds 
Reference Yes. Resulting from draft regulation on introducing the Digital Europe 
Programme (No. 10167/18 + ADD 1, ADD 2, ADD 3). 
Dependence on other 
AP measures 
No. however, it is related to the Smart Industry Action Plan in the Slovak 
Republic. 
 
In order to increase reasonable use of smart intelligence, it is necessary to set areas for which artificial 
intelligence will be beneficial, consider the scope of its deployment and adopt binding rules for its use 
while reflecting general moral principles. For the purposes of dealing with such tasks, including the 
support to the basic research and its connection to its application use, there will be support provided to 
the set up and activities of platforms of research and utilisation of artificial intelligence, which will 
combine interests of the business, academic and government sectors and will closely cooperate with top 
research centres abroad. The government will specifically support activities of those entities that can 
combine interests of a broad group of various stakeholders and opinion leaders in order to reach the 
excellence. At the same time, it will try to prevent brain drain of national experts out of Slovakia. 
D Support to setting up and activities of a platform for research and utilisation of artificial 
intelligence  
Description of the 
measure 
Set up a Slovak platform for research and utilisation of artificial intelligence 
that will play the role of central contact point for academic research teams 
and research centres in industry, business and public sector as well 
innovation labs. By setting up such platforms, we will create and strengthen 
strong feedback between research centres, universities based on the use of 
artificial intelligence in industry and public administration. 
Provide benefit to the society by pointing out at problems and offering 
solutions acquired by scientific research in selected fields of artificial 
intelligence aimed at areas with potential transfer of knowledge into 
practice.  
Take part in shaping positions of the Slovak Republic in different fields of 
artificial intelligence and public policies in general. 
Strengthen education and ethical principles in the field of artificial 
intelligence.  
 9 
Take part in international projects in the field of artificial intelligence in 
order to maximise utilisation of sources of directly managed EU 
programmes as well as other EU funds. 
Strengthen the talent in the field of artificial intelligence as well as more in 
general for IT and thus: 
 Reduce the drain of young people from Slovakia, provide them with a 
competitive alternative in strongly developing area with a huge 
potential, 
 Attract people who left back to Slovakia with the offer of an attractive, 
top level scientific facility, 
 Acquire talents from abroad, make Slovakia attractive for them in the 
short-term and long-term run, 
 Engage talents to the virtual centre of excellence in artificial 
intelligence, 
 Produce skills in the field of artificial intelligence by means of basic and 
applied research at excellent level by combining existing capacities in 
this field in Slovakia,  
 Support education of experts in the field of artificial intelligence,  
 Connect academic, private and public sector, especially by transferring 
knowledge from the academic sector up to application of results in 
practice,  
 Take part in handling tasks resulting from the needs of the society and 
practice with artificial intelligence, including public administration,  
 Predict new events connected to artificial intelligence that can be 
relevant for the society at national, regional, European and international 
level,  
 Contribute to the transition to low-carbon and circular economy,  
Activities of the platform will be further supported by:  
 Promotion of activities of platforms for research and utilisation of 
artificial intelligence, 
 Communication with members of platforms for research and 
utilisation of artificial intelligence in order to support them in 
performing their commitments.  
 
Those activities form the basis of tasks and objectives of the platform for 
research and utilisation of artificial intelligence, whereas their list is not 
final. 
In charge  ODPMII in cooperation with relevant ministries that will be in charge of 
applied use of artificial intelligence  
Deadline / duration / 
measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2019, continuously. The measure implementation started 
after approval of the 2030 Digital Transformation Strategy for Slovakia.   
Main expected output  Setting up of the platform/platforms for research and utilisation of artificial 
intelligence in order to increase innovation capacities of the Slovak 
Republic 
Source of funding  State budget / EU funds 
Reference Yes. It results from draft regulation on introducing the Digital Europe 
Programme (No. 10167/18 + ADD 1, ADD 2, ADD 3). And it also results 
from various strategic documents of the Commission and the Council of 
the EU.  
Dependence on other 
AP measures 
Yes. See Chapter 4.  
 
 10 
Due to the potential of the blockchain technology and its increasing use by public administration in the 
EU as well as in many other developed countries of the world, it is reasonable to provide systemic 
support to the research, testing, deployment and subsequent monitoring of this technology. In cases 
where testing and experimenting demonstrated benefits of this technology compared to more traditional 
solutions, its gradual deployment will be considered also reflecting the “value for money” principle. 
Therefore, the government will support setting up and activities of platforms for research, development 
and use of the blockchain technology that will combine interests of the business, academic and public 
sectors. Depending on results of task tiled “Testing the use of the blockchain technology in public 
administration in pilot projects” and the relevant feasibility study, the government will provide detailed 
proposals of systemic support measures. 
E Support to setting up and activities of the platform for research and utilisation of the blockchain 
technology 
Description of the 
measure 
Set up a Slovak platform for research and utilisation of the blockchain 
technology that will play the role of the central contact point for academic 
research teams and research centres in industry and business sector as well 
innovation labs. By setting up such platform, we will create and strengthen 
strong feedback between research centres, universities, private sector as 
well as innovations based on the use of the blockchain technology in 
industry and public administration 
Support educating experts in the field of the blockchain technology due to 
the multidisciplinary nature of the technology. 
Connect the academic, private and public sector, in particular by means of 
transferring knowledge from the academic sector up to application of 
research results for the use in the private sector and public administration. 
Take part in tasks resulting from the needs of the society, including the 
public administration, in connection to application of the blockchain 
technology. 
Analyse benefits as well as risks of deployment of the blockchain 
technology in public administration and private sector compared to 
traditional technology solutions. 
Analyse and identify suitable pilot projects for testing the blockchain 
technology in industry and public administration. 
Take part in international projects in the field of the blockchain technology 
in order to maximise utilisation of resources from directly managed EU 
programmes as well as other EU funds. 
Those activities form the basis of tasks and objectives of the platform for 
research and utilisation of the blockchain technology, whereas their list is 
not final. 
In charge  ODPMII in cooperation with relevant ministries that will be in charge of 
innovations using the blockchain technology 
Deadline / duration / 
measure 
implementation /  
30 June 2020, continuously. The implementation of the measure has not 
started yet. 
Main expected output  Setting up of the platform/platforms for research and utilisation of the 
blockchain technology in order to increase innovation capacities of the 
Slovak Republic  
Source of funding  State budget / EU funds 
Reference Yes. It results from draft regulation on introducing the Digital Europe 
Programme (No. 10167/18 + ADD 1, ADD 2, ADD 3). And it also results 
from various strategic documents of the Commission and the Council of the 
EU.  
 11 
Dependence on other 
AP measures 
No. 
For full use of innovative technologies, it is necessary to provide support in the form of high-capacity 
hardware. Setting up of the national high-performance computing (HPC) competence centre will 
provide access to expert knowledge, sharing of best practices and enhance possibilities of the use of 
computing time for industry and public administration. Users will be able to use the opportunity to write 
machine code, optimise algorithms and use general consultancy on the use of HPC. Moreover, that will 
provide significant room for co-funding of its activities from directly managed EU programmes as well 
as form the ESIF. Setting up the national high-performance computing competence centre has the 
strategic and legislative support from the EU. 
At the end of 2018, the Slovak republic joined EU Member States and associated members and became 
a part of the EuroHPC (European High Performance Computing Joint Undertaking) Initiative whose 
goal is to build a comprehensive infrastructure and integral ecosystem of supercomputers in Europe and 
develop research activities in the field of big data processing and artificial intelligence, including 
computing architecture for machine learning using the deep learning method. The Nation Competence 
Centre for High Performance Computing will take over the tasks and commitments resulting from 
the EuroHPC Initiative and similar activities. 
The Knowledge economy based on innovations and high added value is one of the key priorities of 
modern European states, whose objective is to remove the dependence on traditional industrial sectors 
(such as mechanical engineering) and create competitive advantage compared to other countries and 
regions. The Slovak Republic needs to significantly support its innovation potential. In the private 
sector, as well as in the academia, science and research, there are capabilities in the form of successful 
teams, projects and companies. A remaining challenge is to set up preconditions for intensive 
development of capabilities in a strong global competition. 
 
Currently, the Slovak investments into science and research are at the lowest level from among V4 
countries (total amount as well as calculated per capita) and, in the European context, we even belong 
to the worst ones. In 2018, the share of science and research in the GDP amounted to app. 0.8% and it 
is obvious that the political goal to reach the amount of 3% in 2020 will not be met. Investment 
incentive to the HPC could significantly help Slovakia launch the leverage effect of other similar 
investments and attract innovation corporate cluster. Setting up such centre is subject to adoption 
of relevant EU legislation (Council Regulation (EU) 2018/1488, establishing the European High 
Performance Computing Joint Undertaking). As the setup of the aforementioned national centre will 
require more systemic preparation, Slovakia will, until then, support establishment of platforms for 
research and use of high-performance computers at the national level as well as for international 
purposes.  
F Support to setting up and activities of national high-performance computing competence centre  
Description of the 
measure 
In March 2017, the European Commission (hereinafter only as the 
“Commission”) adopted the EuroHPC Declaration. It is an agreement in 
which signatory countries undertook to cooperate with each other as well 
as with the Commission regarding purchasing, building and deploying 
integrated infrastructure for latest high-performance computing equipment. 
Access of Slovakia to the EuroHPC was recommended by the Council of 
the Government of the Slovak republic for Science, technology and 
Innovations. National policies and measure sin this field will be coordinated 
by the national high-performance computing competence centre, whose 
primary task will be to build a network of stakeholders from public 
administration, academia as well as private sector.   
Objectives: 
 Make the Slovak Republic become a respected partner in the European 
High Performance Computing Initiative as well as in new technologies 
and big data processing using artificial intelligence (big AI). 
 Strengthen the position of Slovakia as an active member and innovative 
leader in the EuroHPC – Joint Undertaking project carried out with a 
 12 
significant capacity of funding from the EU funds including directly 
managed funds.  
 Provide for implementation of financial and project commitments of the 
Slovak Republic after accessing the EuroHPC joint undertaking. 
 Set up a national ecosystem in the form of public-private partnership 
that combines private, academic and public sector in the field of high-
performance computers and deep learning technology for application 
using artificial intelligence as necessary mechanism for European and 
global competitiveness. 
 
National high-performance computing competence centre will implement 
the government policy in the field of high-performance computing as well 
as high performance computing operations. It will create a systemic 
framework for development and support to the HPC and artificial 
intelligence ecosystem.  
Efficient use of EU funds including directly managed programmes for the 
development of joint projects in the international context.  
Provide the EuroHPC with qualitative partnership, performance of agreed 
tasks including providing of high-performance computing and machine 
time of the national solution.  
Among possible future tasks of the centre are: dissemination of HPC 
application for a broad spectrum of users, in particular companies; provide 
access to scientific and technical expertise by means of application focus of 
the HPC and providing capacities for storing data for super innovative 
solutions; training of capabilities for using HPC solutions; fast growth of 
awareness of the possibilities and necessity of using the HPC; top level 
global technological transfer at the local level. 
In charge  ODPMII in cooperation with the Slovak Academy of Sciences and other 
stakeholders 
Deadline / duration / 
measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2019, continuously. The implementation of the measure has 
not started yet. 
Main expected output  Setting up platforms/platform for research and utilisation of 
supercomputers in the national context as well as for international purposes. 
Setting of the national high-performance computing competence centre 
with its legal capacity. 
Source of funding  Setting up and operation – state budget, development – EU funds 
Reference Yes. Based on Council Regulation (EU) 2018/1488, establishing the 
European High Performance Computing Joint Undertaking. It results from 
draft regulation on introducing the Digital Europe Programme (No. 
10167/18 + ADD 1, ADD 2, ADD 3).  
Dependence on other 
AP measures 
No.  
 
Last but not least, it is necessary to pay attention to cyber security. Every institution and every citizen 
can be targets of cyber attacks. The government must make sure that the level of protection of provided 
online services safeguarded their reliable and secure providing. Building cyber security is necessary and 
it is being built at four levels in Slovakia – institutional, legislative and strategic, operational and 
technical and personal. Therefore, it will be necessary to review and strengthen the functioning model 
of cooperation in the field of cyber security among relevant public authorities, private sector and the 
academia. Along with the above, there is a need for a continuous process of building public awareness 
of cyber security as well as targeted support to other activities in this field, including science and 
research, standardisation, building expert capacities and education and coordination with other centres 
in the EU. Therefore, we propose setting up of the national competence centre for cyber security. Its 
establishment will provide significant room for funding its activities from directly managed EU 
 13 
programmes as well as from the European Structural and Investment Funds. Setting up such centre 
results from the EU legislation (proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and the Council 
establishing the European Cybersecurity Industrial, Technology and Research Competence Centre and 
the Network of National Coordination Centres). 
G Support to setting up and activities of the national competence and coordination centre for 
cyber security  
Description of the 
measure 
National competence and coordination centre for cyber security should 
perform the following tasks:  
 Support to the European competence centre in reaching its goals and, 
in particular, in coordinating the community of cyber security 
competences, 
 Strengthening of cyber security capacities of the country, knowledge 
and infrastructure for different industries, public sector and the 
research community, 
 Contribution to general deployment of cyber security products and 
solutions in the economy as such, 
 Improvement of the understanding of cyber security and contribution 
to completing missing skills in the field of cyber security, 
 Contribution to strengthening of cyber security research and 
development in the Union, including facilitation and acceleration of 
processes of standardisation and certification, in particular, in the field 
of cyber security certification systems in the sense of adopted 
regulation – Act on cyber security, 
 Support to participation of the sector and other stakeholders, at the 
level of Member States, in cross-border projects,  
 In cooperation with the European competence centre, contribution to 
identifying and looking for solutions of cyber security challenges in 
different fields, cooperation in the development of new technologies 
in the field of cyber security, including encryption, 
 Acting as the contact point with the community of cyber security 
competences, other national competence centres and the European 
competence centre, 
 Effort to make synergies with relevant activities at the national and 
regional level,  
 Execution of special activities for which the European competence 
centre provided grants, including providing financial support to third 
parties, according to Article 204 of the new regulation on budgetary 
rules of the EU under the terms specified in relevant agreements on 
the grant,  
 Promotion and dissemination of relevant results of activities of the 
network, community of cyber security competences and the 
competence centre at national or regional level,  
 Evaluation of applications from entities residing in Slovakia for 
accessing the community of cyber security competences,  
 Cooperation of national competence and coordination centres,  
 Evaluation of the use of artificial intelligence in the field of cyber 
security for the purposes of automation of security procedures, 
identification and mitigation of incidents,  
 Support to education of future experts and building capacities. 
 
Mechanisms of implementation: 
 Carry out survey of current research tasks in the field of security, 
 Set up research and implementation partnerships with organisations 
operating in the field of security at the national and regional level  
 Propose innovative procedures for solutions of identified research 
tasks using the technology of machine learning and artificial 
intelligence  
 14 
 Increase the ability to mitigate incidents by implementing and 
utilising proposed procedures  
 
The goal of the joint research activity is to increase the awareness of 
activities of the National competence centre, cooperation in identifying 
and dealing with actual security problems and extensions of possibilities 
and abilities of the office to carry out its mission and increase security of 
the cyber space. 
In charge  National Security Authority in cooperation with the ODPMII  
Deadline / duration / 
measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2020, continuously. The implementation of the measure has 
not started yet. 
Main expected output  Setting up the national competence and coordination centre for cyber 
security with its legal capacity. 
Source of funding  Establishment and operation – state budget, development – EU funds 
Reference Yes. Based on proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and 
the Council establishing the European Cybersecurity Industrial, 
Technology and Research Competence Centre and the Network of 
National Coordination Centres. It also results from draft regulation on 
introducing the Digital Europe Programme (No. 10167/18 + ADD 1, ADD 
2, ADD 3).  
Dependence on other 
AP measures 
No 
Coordination of tasks and activities of the Acton Plan  
Working level: establishment of a working group for the digital transformation 
Monitoring of performance of different measures as well as setting of the Action Plan for the following 
period will be carried out by the Directorate General for Digital Agenda at the ODPMII (hereinafter 
as the “DGDA”). The aforementioned unit will set measurable indicators for set goals and the method 
of data collection for their evaluation in regular intervals, in cooperation with relevant ministries and 
the expert public. Based on results of the monitoring, it will be possible to update the Action Plan in the 
future. The organisational unit will also give recommendations for more effective implementation of 
tasks carried out by other ministries, above all in problematic areas. 
Along with that, there will be working group for the digital transformation (hereinafter as the 
“Working Group”) at the ODPMII in order to provide assistance to the DGDA in implementing 
measures of the Action Plan and it will also include affected ministries and main stakeholders. For this 
purpose, the DGDA will prepare the Statute of the Working Group that will be of a light and flexible 
nature and that will define its tasks. One of its tasks will also be to evaluate new technological trends, 
as well as other objective effects that may have impact on the topicality of the Action Plan. The Working 
Group will also take part in early evaluation of relevant measures from the viewpoint of their actual 
benefit. If necessary, the Working Group will take part in preparation of Slovak positions for the 
purposes of negotiations in committees and working groups of EU institutions, it will recommend 
innovations in different areas and assist in implementation of changes. It is expected that the Working 
Group will be proactive and it will come up with new features and ideas. The functioning and intensity 
of the Working Group will be determined by the DGDA based on the plan of activities and tasks. That 
plan will also serve as the basis for reporting.  
Based on progress reports, the DGDA will prepare Information about performance of the Action Plan 
prior to sessions of the Council of the Government of the Slovak Republic for Digitalization of the 
Public Administration and Digital Single Market. It will inform about the progress regularly, in a 
transparent and comprehensible format. Subsequently, the Information about performance of the Action 
Plan will be submitted to the Government of the Slovak Republic (every year as of 30 September).  
For its activities, the Working Group can also invite the expert public, academia or representatives of 
industry and civil society. Proposed measures of the Action Plan cover a broad range of social areas. 
 15 
Therefore, it is necessary to have relevant views and look for balance among eligible interests of 
participating parties. For the overall success of implementation of the Action Plan, it is necessary to 
have open and regular communication with the public about implementation processes.  
Communication will be provided using the website and social networks of the ODPMII that will publish 
all reports and news related to implementation of the Action Plan. The goal is to make the public aware 
of what is being prepared and to provide the public with the possibility to express their attitudes and 
opinions. The owner of the document will provide information about changes so that relevant entities 
can get thoroughly and sufficiently prepared. 
Political level: Council of the Government of the Slovak Republic for Digitalization of the Public 
Administration and Digital Single Market  
The Council of the Government of the Slovak Republic for Digitalization of the Public Administration 
and Digital Single Market (hereinafter as the “Council”) as the advisory, coordinating and initiating 
body of the Government of the Slovak republic for matters concerning informatization, digital single 
market and digitalization of the public administration will, at the political level, monitor performance 
of measures of the Action Plan. At the same time, it will be preparing standpoints and recommendations 
for the Government of the Slovak Republic. At regular session, members of the Council will be informed 
about performance of measures as well as about preparation of the next action plan for the following 
period. The Council will provide political supervision over the procedure of performance of tasks. The 
Council will also discuss possible disputable issues in order to find consensus and political support for 
solutions selected as the best ones based on objective evidence.  
 
 
  
 16 
Implementation of the Action Plan  
Measures in the Action Plan are broken down to three groups, based on their nature: 
– Regulation: Definition of concepts, preparation of the strategy and legislative framework draft. 
– Organisation: Structural measures that will enable preparation for the implementation in 
practice and experimenting, strengthening of the technological capacity and human resources, 
connecting communities. 
– Projects: Implementation of relevant measures in practice in the form of projects and initiatives.  
Regulation for the 21st century 
In order to support significant transformation of the society and building of a vital data economy in 
Slovakia, it is necessary to combine conceptual thinking and long-term vision with implementation of 
experiments in order to achieve optimum level of innovations of public policies. Public policies are 
important because they make it possible to concentrate the energy of the public sector on solutions of 
the most important problems. 
Current legislation often does not count with new technologies. An important way how to modernize 
economy and public administration is to set legislative frameworks for the needs of the 21st century, 
either by means of simplifying, removing obsolete rules or adopting new concepts, if it is effective (for 
example, in the field of data use). 
In proposing solutions of problems, we prefer simplifying and removing current regulations 
wherever it is possible. We perceive the digital single market as an opportunity how to adjust regulatory 
frameworks to the digital era and eliminate unnecessary and double rules. All new proposals must be 
thoroughly evaluated. We support, above all, pan-European solutions and electronic support to 
demonstrate compliance with regulations, thus, new rules should lead to harmonisation and removals of 
unnecessary regulations at the national level and prevent occurrence of the so called unjustified “gold 
plating”.2 Matters concerning ex post evaluation of regulations, “one-in one-out” principle (when new 
regulation is adopted, one existing regulation will be cancelled), gold plating and dynamic regulations 
are treated more in detail in RIA 2020 – Strategy for better regulation. In the process of implementation 
of the Action Plan, there will be methodologies prepared for deploying such tools of better regulation 
into practice. 
On a continuous basis, we will introduce dynamic regulation in different sectors that will enable 
affected entities to experiment and innovate procedures in order to achieve the expected goal of the 
regulation. Dynamic regulation does not prescribe any precise procedure of how to keep it and leaves 
more freedom to the business sector. It is suitable especially for very fast developing sectors, such as 
digital and platform economy.  
There is an experimental regulatory concept, so called regulatory sandbox used for the purposes of 
testing new regulatory measures prior to their general deployment. In it, the government will propose 
controlled experiments where companies can legally operate in the new manner, while state 
administration employees will continuously evaluate results, consult with consumers and market 
participants and acquire knowledge for broader initiatives. 
Stress on personal data protection  
The intent of the Action Plan also encompasses building trust of persons using digital technologies, 
ensuring protection of shared data and setting conditions for creating responsible and adequate process 
of digital transformation. Specific attention in implementation of proposed measures of this Action Plan 
will be paid to protection of fundamental rights and freedoms of natural persons, in particular right to 
privacy in connection to personal data processing and compliance with requirements put on personal 
data protection in relevant European3 as well as national legislation4. Before the process of 
implementation of those measures referred to in this Action Plan, when personal data is processed (in 
                                                     
 
2 Gold-plating is a pejorative expression referring to undesired expansion of the content of EU directives in a manner that introduces new 
regulatory burden without adequate benefits for national legislation and competitiveness. 
3 Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council (EU) 2016/679 of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard 
to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection 
Regulation (O.J. EU L 119, 4 May 2016). 
4  In particular, Act No. 18/2018 Coll. on personal data protection and on amendment to other acts as amended. 
 17 
particular setting up and deployment of new information systems and technologies), the data protection 
impact assessment will be made in the sense of Art. 35 of the General Data Protection Regulation and 
prior consultation with the supervisory authority will be used in the sense of Art. 36 of the General Data 
Protection Regulation prior to the data processing, if the data protection impact assessment implies that 
such processing could lead to high risk unless the controller adopts measures to mitigate the risk. 
When introducing innovative technologies that will work with personal data, consideration will be paid 
to deployment of innovative tools for application of rights of affected persons and compliance with the 
notification obligations as well as recommendation and guidelines of the European Data Protection 
Board (EDPB) 5.  
Referring to only a part of obligations from the GDPR and the Data Protection Act in the Action Plan 
does not affect other obligations resulting from the aforementioned and other relevant regulations. 
Innovation laboratories as the new means of performing public administration in the digital era 
The preferred way how to achieve substantial changes is introduction of innovation laboratories for 
various sectors of public administration. Innovation laboratories will be in charge of: 
 Proposing solutions of problems in the particular sector, 
 Proposing changes of policies and recommendations in the particular sector (e.g. legislation 
amendments), 
 Proposing new concepts, pilot projects and experiments, 
 Making experiments (including experimental verification of regulations), 
 Monitoring effectiveness of regulatory modes. 
In innovation laboratories, there will be partnerships made between public, private and academic sectors 
and ecosystems will be set up (or be parts of the ecosystem). 
Innovation laboratories are necessary in all important areas where we want to achieve improvement of 
effectiveness of public policies. It is continuation of the concept of analytical units in public 
administration that has been set up to large extent already. While analytical units are able to offer 
independent viewpoints, high quality analytical documents, assessments of policies and 
recommendations, innovation laboratories will bring results in experimenting and verifying ideas that 
will be subsequently prepared for implementation in practice. An important aspect of the concept of 
innovation laboratories is ensuring funding for promising projects, connection of stakeholders from 
various sectors and assistance in acquiring capital for innovative companies and institutions that can 
handle identified problems in particular sectors. 
System of evaluation of preliminary performance of the Action Plan  
For an effective implementation of the Action Plan, it makes sense to set relevant indicators for different 
measures that will make it possible to evaluate success of performance. The overall ambition goes 
deeper than simple reporting if the task was met in the sense of relevant resolution of the government.  
Digital transformation of Slovakia is a long-term process including lots of impacts that are hard to 
calculate. They affect not only internal coordination of dozens of public administration institutions that 
often act as sovereign “silos” as well as eternal elements influencing the focus of the public sector at the 
national level as well as more global direction in international environment. The 2030 Strategy for 
Digital Transformation of Slovakia has set the vision until 2030, reflecting the dynamics of development 
in ICT sector, onset of new technologies as well as prioritizing of digital policies at national, European 
and international levels using the key tool – short-term action plans.  
It is a well-known fact that the present Commission evaluates, on annual basis, success of countries 
from the viewpoint of the level of digital economy and society using DESI index (Digital Economy and 
Society Index). Updated index for 2019 was published in June and Slovakia ranked 21st out of the total 
28, with most evaluated indicators oscillating under the EU average. Compared to 2018 we went down 
one place, not only due to updating the calculation and methodology, even despite the fact we grew in 
majority of segments (most significantly in digital public services). The main reason is that other EU 
                                                     
 
5 European Data Protection Board (EDPB) has been set up on the basis of Art. 68 of the Regulation.  
 18 
Member States are growing faster. A more detailed description of DESI is provided in the Strategy. 
Evaluation of the Slovak position in the DESI index for 2019 can be found in Annex 1.  
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) also issues its own index (Going 
Digital Toolkit), which processed data from developed countries in the past years. The situation there is 
similar to DESI. The government can directly influence an interesting part of evaluated areas, however, 
not all of them as it does not have direct influence on the level of digitalisation of companies or use of 
services and means of internet by the population, for example. However, by means of various stimuli as 
well as suitably set initiatives, the government can support increasing the level of those areas. Both, 
DESI and Going Digital Toolkit, talk about the level of key areas of the digital transformation in the 
country, while it is possible to conclude that the most successful countries in Europe and world-wide 
are best prepared for it. Evaluation of the Slovak position in the OECD Going Digital Toolkit index can 
be found in Annex 2.  
From the viewpoint of the current Action Plan, in particular, the dynamics of the social situation at the 
time of its approval, it seems that the best solution is to make use of agreed managing mechanism, i.e. 
working group for the digital transformation as well as the Council of the Government for Digitalisation 
of Public Administration and Digital Single Market that will analyse, in detail, the purposefulness and 
expected status of different measures. The key task will be to prepare measurable indicators, including 
starting and target values as well as risks. We propose setting aforementioned indices DESI and Going 
Digital Toolkit as reference goals, taking into account that they get updated every year. In this respect, 
it will be necessary to remember that even performance of majority of measures of the Action Plan will 
not enable to reach the monitored indicator to full extent (100%), however, it can significantly increase 
the Slovak assessment. Many measures of the Action Plan has the impact on strengthening of such key 
indicators, in general, such as the share of science, research and innovations on the GDP, growth of the 
level of digital economy, number of citizens engaged in programmes for increasing digital skills and 
increasing the level of digitalisation of companies especially SMEs, in the national economy. Exact 
setting as well as the level of expectation of indicators performance should be, anyway, subject to expert 
debate.  
However, it is obvious that the performance of measures of the Action Plan will significantly contribute 
to increasing of the digital level of our country and help to improve indicators. 
Technologies used in the Action Plan 
The process of the digital transformation focuses on several technological trends thanks to which it is 
possible to achieve success in the digital transformation of economy sectors. It is necessary to reasonably 
consider capacity possibility of Slovakia and the perspective of future development of the trends in 
Slovakia. If we, as a small country, want to succeed, we must focus on technologies: 
 That at the beginning of their broader deployment, especially in the EU and whose initial testing 
and pilot projects demonstrated their prevailingly beneficial potential, 
 Which do not require significant investments exceeding possibilities of the country, 
 For which there are existing capacities (in the early stage), 
 Where we can attract talents from abroad relatively fast, 
 To which it is possible to apply principles of openness and free access, 
 That enable multiple use.  
Openness, free access, multiple use are the qualities that will help to meet criteria for success of projects 
and, at the same time, they are signs of a modern civil society. Looking at the current trends that meet 
such requirements, it seems that the most effective approach is to support the following priority 
technologies and areas in the broader sense of the meaning.   
 Artificial intelligence6: to let us use the state-of-the-art technologies and find sufficient 
utilisation for them. Talking about artificial intelligence in Slovakia, we mean two important 
factors. On the part of the supply, we need existence of a sufficient number of companies that can 
create and provide services using the artificial intelligence technology that can design and 
                                                     
 
6 Artificial intelligence – systems or algorithms that are able to monitor their environment, learn and adopt or propose decisions based on 
learned knowledge and acquired experience.   
 19 
implement new business models and that will be competitive also from international viewpoint. 
From the viewpoint of the demand, we need our companies to apply sophisticated solutions and 
innovations in their processes in the form of new solutions, optimising of existing activities and 
thus save costs and operate at higher level of productivity. 
 Data and privacy protection: to let us create functional basis for a prosperous data economy, in 
which consumers have rights and are safe. Data presents the key means to support each existing 
sector. It is necessary to create a comprehensive ecosystem of partners from the private, public 
and academic sector that can propose services and bring real applications. We also need high 
quality data sets. The basic requirement for functioning of data economy is creating a sufficient 
number of data sources on the commercial basis and ensuring a transparent system of its 
administration as well as securing such sources and data so that it is understood and protected as 
key social resource with the goal of protecting people and the society from misuse or unauthorised 
access and use of such data. 
 Supercomputers (HPC)7 – to provide us with access to high performance computing and storage 
capacity that also effectively uses resources and is the cornerstone of success in the digital era.  
 Fixed and mobile next generation networks – to let us have access to ultra-fast broadband 
connection, enhancement of new generation technologies and to let us transfer data without 
limitation of the transmitting capacity. Subsequently, it is necessary to build 5G networks8 to 
support autonomous and connected mobility and smart transportation systems.  
 Internet of Things (IoT)9 – to let us use technologies for which we, as a country, are already 
showing promising potential. In particular, the content of education at various basic and 
secondary schools and universities in Slovakia has already been extended with IoT, thanks to 
which Slovak pupils and students have excellent performance in IoT and robotics. In Slovakia, 
there are several companies with rich know-how and experience in this field.  
 Blockchain10 - to let us consider alternative methods in order to build infrastructure, architecture 
and trust in providing public digital services, increase transparency in providing access to public 
data, provide trustworthy and auditable records, consider possible savings, analyse possibilities 
of higher effectiveness and efficiency of information systems as well as clearly define formal 
processes and relations in institutions in the form of automated digital processes.   
 
Data economy will be built on the principle that if it is possible to separate personal data from other 
data, rights and obligations resulting from the General Data Protection Regulation will be fully 
applicable to any data also in the case personal data constitute only a small part of the data set. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                     
 
7 Supercomputers are thousands of processors working on analysing billions of data concurrently, in real time, and thus making computations 
and analyses significantly faster than ordinary computers.  
8 5G network – fifth generation network that differs from currently used LTE network by tis performance and transmitting speed. In that 
network, data is transferred by means of higher frequency range, which helps to transfer data faster.  
9 Internet of Things is devices that communicate with humans and with each other over the Internet.  
10 Blockchain technology is infrastructure that enables various distributed software applications save, store and provide access to data in a way 
that guarantees high level of accessibility and integrity of such data (data is authentic, undeniable, it is not possible to modify data and such 
data is practically impossible to damage), and – if desirable – also confidentiality. 
 20 
1. We will support digital transformation of schools and education in 
order to improve the quality and preconditions for employments and 
acquisition of digital skills and competences necessary for the digital 
era 
Strategic objective We will support digital transformation of schools and education in order to improve 
the quality and preconditions for employments and acquisition of digital skills and competences 
necessary for the digital era is composed of two themes:  
1.1  Education and digital skills, 
1.2  Modernization and opening of the labour market. 
High quality education is the cornerstone of every successful society and modern state and it is the 
starting point for future prosperity of the country. The current time necessarily requires increasingly 
higher literacy of people in all age categories. Due to the fact that this trend will intensify it is necessary 
to improve educational processes and, above all, adjust them to the needs of the digital era. It applies to 
all levels of education of pupils and students as well as education of employees and further education of 
adults and seniors.  
1.1 Education and digital skills  
 
In the long run, Slovak companies as well as public administration, have been suffering from shortage 
of labour with basic as well as advanced digital skills11, with sufficient experience in the use of 
technologies or insufficient technical background and education. Based on results of the DESI index for 
201812, we can evaluate that 59 % Slovaks have at least the basic level of digital skills, which is slightly 
above the EU average (57 %).  
Ambition 
We will introduce more effective support to education in the digital era by means of courses for 
students and teachers with the focus on understanding the importance of the function of data, 
forming and maintaining the secure digital identity of persons and companies, analysis and 
classification of information as well as basic skills required for deeper understanding of 
information technologies (e.g. program coding starting in early years). We will prepare the 
Programme for Informatization of Education with the Outlook Until 2030  
with the emphasis on competences for the digital era and digital transformation of education and 
schools. We will design the support to development of digital skills and competences for the digital 
era from the early age to make everyone equipped with the set of key competences for human and 
digital world. Along with that, we will support the use of digital technologies in order to increase 
the success of the process of education. We will focus on setting up the system for lifelong 
improvement of digital skills. In cooperation with the Digital Coalition, we will prepare an analysis 
of the condition of digital skills in Slovakia with proposals of particular measures and we will set 
up an effective mechanism to counter disinformation. 
Regulation 
Particular measures of the Action Plan refer, in many cases, to already approved measures of the Smart 
Industry Action Plan, however, the content of the Action Plan has a broader scope and includes the 
entire digital economy and society. The particular part of the Action Plan is a follow up to the National 
                                                     
 
11 Skills means a set of activities that a person can perform and use in limited and precisely defined contexts. Competences are a set of certain 
preconditions for so called correct activity in the given situation.  
12 Digital Economy and Society Index (DESI) 2018, Country Report Slovakia, 
http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/newsroom/image/document/2018-20/sk-desi_2018-country-profile_eng_B4415E7E-9154-E26E-
7B403212919F3F7C_52238.pdf (17.1.2019) 
 21 
Programme for Development of Education. Besides that, implementation of several measures will be 
based on the currently prepared Programme for Informatization of Education Until 2030.  
1.1.1 Preparation of the Programme for Informatization of Education until 2030 
Description of the 
measure 
It refers to enhancement of approved measure No. 12, chap. 3 of the Smart 
Industry Action Plan with the focus on competences for the digital era and the 
digital transformation of education and schools.  
Strategic areas for preparation of the Programme for Informatization of 
education with the Outlook until 2030 for regional schools, universities and 
life-long education are: 
 ICT infrastructure from the central to regional level, 
 Electronic services and information system of the ministry, 
 Digital technologies for innovations and improvement of the quality of 
education, 
 Development of competences and skills for the digital transformation, 
 Transformation of schools into digital schools, improvement of the 
management using data and ICT, 
 Security in the information space. 
 
Goals and measures ensuring the digital transformation of education and 
schools will be further elaborated in legislative and organisational measures 
that will enable reaching objectives of the programme by means of projects 
and initiates, experimental verification of new procedures and their 
implementation in practice, strengthening of human resources 
and technological equipment, improvement of cooperation and application of 
best practices by connecting communities in education.  
In charge Ministry of Education  
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2019 and continuously. The implementation of the measure has 
started.  
Source of funding  State budget  
Main expected 
output  
Strategic document – Programme for Informatization of Education Until 2030 
Reference Smart Industry Action Plan in the Slovak Republic. 
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No 
1.1.2 Systemic change of the system of education preparing employees for the needs of economy  
Description of the 
measure 
The measure materially enhances measure No. 4 Chapter 3.3 of the Smart 
Industry Action Plan for the entire digital economy as well as the society. 
Preparation of proposals for improving the quality of the system of education 
in order to prepare such graduates that are needed in Slovakia, with the focus 
on key economic sectors and, subsequently, for national priorities resulting 
from Agenda 2030. Key tasks for systems of regional education, university 
education and life-long education: 
 
 Increasing the share of employed graduates who work in the field of their 
study and make use of the competence profile they acquired by their 
education, 
 Increasing the share of employed graduates who do not need to go through 
employer’s induction training programme to develop general skills, 
 Promotion and support to high-quality study of IT, mathematics and, in 
general, technical and natural sciences. Update of the concept of IT and 
mathematics education and increase of competences for the digital era 
starting at primary schools, 
 22 
 Support to teaching of algorithmic thinking, development of reading, 
mathematics and natural science literacy, digital skills, creativity, critical 
thinking, team work, empathy, building high quality social relations and 
use of the exploration approach in education, 
 Creating and continuous updating of profiles of graduates and study majors 
at secondary vocational schools and universities in cooperation with the 
academia and employers for the needs of the labour market and the digital 
economy, 
 Systemic reform of education – introduction of more flexible and shorter 
forms of tertiary education, participation of employers in the setting of 
study majors and profiles of graduates, change of the system of universities 
management in order to meet needs of the labour market in strategic 
decision making, 
 Introduction of a new system of education and further development of 
experts for the labour market and the digital economy, based on integration 
of theoretical education and training in the workplace with acquiring 
practical skills with advanced technologies (bachelor study majors, 
alternative higher vocational – specialised education without limitation of 
later education),  
 Setting up and application of broadly applicable profiles of graduates and 
their competences across sectors and qualifications with the potential for 
adaptation to changes in the process of digital transformation, 
 Enhancement of competences of Sectoral Councils as platforms for 
cooperation between the academia, government and relevant industries in 
setting up and updating curricula, 
 Preparation of proposals for improvements in the system of management, 
financing and forms of education and support to the growth of competences 
of teachers and other school employees leading to an increase of desired 
competences of pupils and students to let the system of education meet 
labour market needs in the digital economy. Findings from measure No. 
1.1.7. will be used as applicable, 
 Improvement of the diagnostics of talents and work with gifted youth as 
the material requirement to support innovative competent labour force for 
the digital economy, 
 Based on the UN Convention, Optional Protocol to the UN Convention on 
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and following measures, in the 
preparation for the needs of practice on the equal basis with other persons 
with disabilities, provide access to information and communication, 
including information and communications technologies and systems, 
including communication with the public sector and services provided to 
the public. 
 
Prepare necessary general conditions in the system of education in the 
Programme for Informatization of Education with the Outlook Until 2030 for 
the digital transformation of education and schools: 
 Propose completion and consolidation of the new organisation and 
education culture that will make it possible to increase the level of 
personalisation of education processes, 
 Prepare and verify, in a pilot project, preparing setting up such conditions 
for schools to help them move away from the obsolete administrative mode 
of operation to a proactive mode characterised by autonomy, self-
reflection, self-management, self-evaluation and cooperation leading to 
education harmony and schools as knowledge organisations – for a higher 
quality of education, 
 23 
 Support evaluation of the development of social capital in the context of 
the society and, in particular, system of education, to renew the trust in the 
system, culture of relations and social recognition – in particular 
concerning teachers and for the maximum utilisation of the personal 
potential young people have when entering the system of education. 
 To support the digital transformation of education and schools by preparing 
a reference model of “digital school” in the Programme for Informatization 
of Education with the Outlook Until 2030 that will be based on current 
trends of EU Member States in the field of digital transformation of 
education and schools and increasing competences of teachers for the 
digital era, recommendations of the Commission and will reflect conditions 
of Slovakia. The refence model will map the process of the digital 
transformation of schools from the viewpoint of primary affects areas and 
education participants, 
 Prepare transformation of university education for the needs of the 
information society in cooperation with universities. 
In charge Ministry of Education in cooperation with the Ministry of Labour (Sectoral 
Councils Alliance) 
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2020. The implementation of the measure has started. 
Source of funding  State budget / EU funds 
Main expected 
output  
Proposal of a systemic change of the system of education  
Reference Smart Industry Action Plan. 
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
1.1.1  
1.1.3 Life-long education – comprehensive systemic change, strategy and implementation of 
legislative measures  
Description of the 
measure 
The measure extends measure No. 9 Chapter 3.3 of the Smart Industry Action 
Plan for the entire digital economy as well as the society. A modern digital 
economy must absolutely necessarily respond to new qualifications. It is only 
possible in cooperation with employers while it is important to:  
 Ensure effective coordination of entities operating in the system of life-
long education by means of motivational features.  
 Set multi-source funding (combination of private and public sources) of 
the system of life-long education and, at the same time, enable decision 
making about the use of funds in the competence of those that are directly 
affected – employees, the unemployed looking for jobs based on acquiring 
new skills, employers. Use the tools such as personal accounts or education 
vouchers.  
 Reflect new requirements on the labour market connected to the 
development of digital technologies in the National System of Jobs and its 
further elaboration for future jobs.  
 Support education, training and transfer of knowledge – development of 
practical and new highly specialised skills of graduates and employees, 
especially in industrial practice. 
 Prepare, introduce and implement, in cooperation with universities and the 
Office of Labour, Social Affairs and Family, systemic measures by means 
of new national projects such as “Education for job seekers” and 
“Education for young job seekers” and other targeted trainings providing 
development of human resources, their competences for needs of the 
labour market  with better reflection of individual needs of individuals 
responding to the education market offers in connection to the labour 
market demand,  
 24 
 Increase digital skills and competences of the employed.  
Above all, it is supposed to support motivation to get educated and develop 
one’s knowledge and skills and, if necessary, the need to change the original 
qualification acquired during the preparation for the job in the school system, 
i.e. the willingness to requalify, if the situation in the labour market requires 
so. 
In charge Ministry of Education in cooperation with the Ministry of Labour (Sectoral 
Councils Alliance) 
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2019. The implementation of the measure has started. 
Source of funding  State budget / EU funds 
Main expected 
output  
Proposal of a systemic change of life-long education 
Reference Smart Industry Action Plan. 
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
1.1.1  
Organisation  
1.1.4 Setting up a working group in order to build a coordinated mechanism to counter 
disinformation  
Description of the 
measure 
Intentional, systemic and extensive dissemination of disinformation is one of 
the most serious challenges for European democracy and societies. In 
December 2018, the European Commission presented the Action Plan Against 
Disinformation, whose main purpose is to strengthen existing as well as build 
new mechanisms to eliminate this dangerous phenomenon, including artificial 
intelligence applications.  
  
Due to the above, it is necessary for Slovakia to introduce a coordinated 
mechanism to strengthen activities aimed at increasing general awareness of 
the public of the negative impact of disinformation and fake news, at increasing 
media literacy and at supporting independent media and high-quality 
journalism. The government must strengthen its own means and capacities to 
counter disinformation and cooperate with specialists from the public, private 
and civil sectors in uncovering, analysing and publishing disinformation 
campaigns. One possible tool of cooperation is setting up multidisciplinary 
teams of independent information verifiers and research employees who will 
uncover disinformation campaigns on social networks. The Ministry of 
Foreign and European Affairs of the Slovak Republic (MFA), as the first 
central state administration body, set up its department of strategic 
communication in 2017 and its key rile is and continue to be to identify, 
monitor and rebut disinformation concerning foreign policy. In this effort, the 
MFA also cooperates with the civil society. Besides that, the MFA (ad hoc) 
summons inter-department consultancy group to counter disinformation. In 
March 2019, the EU launched operation of the Rapid Alert System, which was 
built on secure digital platform where member States can share information 
about on-going foreign disinformation campaigns and coordinate their 
responses. 
 
To set up the national mechanism to counter disinformation, it will be 
necessary to set up a working group including all relevant central state 
administration bodies. Due to prevailing security aspects and effects of 
disinformation on the security environment in the Slovak republic, it is suitable 
to set up such working group at the Office of the Security Council of the Slovak 
Republic.   
  
 25 
The national mechanism, which will be necessary to strengthen coordination 
of activities of countering disinformation, will need to: 
 Support cooperation with NGOs that are extraordinarily active in our 
country and effective in countering disinformation, along with systemic 
increase of literacy and strengthening of independent journalism, 
 Look for financial models to support the maximum possible benefit and 
effectiveness of the mechanism, 
 Clearly support more active cooperation and sharing information with 
independent media and NGOs. 
In charge Chairman of the Security Council of the Slovak Republic (coordinated by the 
Office of the Security Council of the Slovak Republic) 
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2019 – setting up of the working group  
31 December 2020 – setting up of the coordinated mechanism to counter 
disinformation in the sense of recommendations of the working group  
Source of funding  State budget  
Main expected 
output  
Setting up of the working group  
Setting up of the coordinated mechanism to counter disinformation in the sense 
of recommendations of the working group  
Reference None. It is based on strategic document – Action Plan Against Disinformation  
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No 
 
Projects 
1.1.5 Preparation of an analysis of the condition of digital skills in Slovakia with a proposal of 
particular measures  
Description of the 
measure 
Preparation of the Analysis of the condition of digital skills and competences 
in Slovakia with a proposal of particular measures and setting up standards of 
digital literacy for citizens also by means of projects such as “Buď 
KOMPetentný – Zamestnaj sa!/Be COMPetent – Get a job!” and “eSMART.” 
The national standard of digital literacy for citizens will set digital 
competences necessary for the study, work and life for all groups of population 
– pupils, including pupils with special education needs, students, adult 
inhabitants in the productive age and seniors. The basic starting point to 
determine digital competences of citizens constitutes the European Digital 
Competence Framework for Citizens.  
In charge ODPMII, in cooperation with the Ministry of Education, Ministry of Labour 
and social and economic partners 
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2020. The Implementation of the measure has already started. 
Source of funding  EU funds 
Main expected 
output  
Analysis 
Reference No 
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No 
 26 
1.1.6 Support to activities aimed at increasing the share of women in IT and digital sector  
Description of the 
measure 
Despite the fact that the share of women studying IT majors increased in 
Slovakia from 3 - 5 % to 10 - 12 % in the last five years, women are still not 
sufficiently presented with the attractiveness and the potential of their study 
and professional opportunities in IT and digital sector. We must remove the 
ongoing low demand and let women get fully involved and engaged in the 
digital sector by means of educative promotion of ICT study majors and job 
opportunities. 
Particular measures: 
 Support to education and study of ICT majors, 
 Support to projects that promote engagement of women in IT jobs and girls 
in IT study, 
 Promotion, in cooperation with industrial companies, by means of stays, 
study visits and workshops,  
 More intensive cooperation with private sector initiatives. 
In charge Ministry of Education in cooperation with the ODPMII and Ministry of Labour 
and partners dealing with this field  
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
30 June 2020 and continuously. The implementation of the measure has not 
started yet. 
Source of funding  State budget  
Main expected 
output  
Support to projects and scholarships  
Reference No  
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No  
1.1.7 Preparation of a study of the digital transformation and recommendations at the national 
level in the field of employment, qualifications and labour forms – Work 4.0 
Description of the 
measure 
Preparation of a study that will result in proposals of strategic priorities and 
measures for employment in connection to education in the digital economy. 
It is part of national project Sectorally managed innovations towards an 
effective labour market in the Slovak Republic, approved as part of the Smart 
Industry Action Plan, measure No. 3, Chapter 3.3. 
In charge Ministry of Labour (sectoral councils) in cooperation with the Ministry of 
Education  
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2019  
Source of funding  EU funds 
Main expected 
output  
Study   
Reference No  
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No  
1.1.8 Support to increasing competences of young people for the digital era in the formal education  
Description of the 
measure 
The absolute priority is to create preconditions and increase mathematical, 
technological and digital literacy at primary and secondary schools as quickly 
as possible. It entails extension of approved measure No. 6 Chapter 3.3 of the 
Smart Industry Action Plan: 
 Enhance teaching of mathematics and IT at primary schools and introduce 
innovative methods of education as the basis for mathematical and digital 
literacy for the needs of the digital economy, 
 27 
 After elaboration of the concept for teaching mathematics in order to set 
mathematics as a mandatory subject for the school leaving examination, 
open the discussion about making it mandatory for all students taking the 
school leaving examination in two steps: in the first step, for those 
interested in study at technical and science faculties, in the second step, for 
all other students taking the school leaving examination as it has been 
introduced by all neighbouring countries, 
 Ensure development of digital skills for teachers in order to let them make 
full use of the digital curriculum and thus motivate pupils to use and 
acquire digital competences,  
 Define and incorporate competences for the digital era and digital skills to 
all state and school education programmes, 
 Create conditions for continuous flexible creation of more suitable, 
predictable and interdisciplinary education programmes at all levels of 
education with a better system of financial support, 
 Support increasing higher and specialised skills for IoT, data science, 
artificial intelligence, programming, for the needs of STEM studies 
(science, technology, engineering and mathematics), team work and 
collaborative and co-creative procedures, creative designing and trading as 
well as other fields of economy and public administration due to their 
digital transformation, 
 Identify current offer of education, courses, training programmes 
and sharing best practices in education, including education with the use 
of digital technologies, especially among providers of high quality formal 
and informal education, civil associations, private companies, universities 
and sample regional schools that acquired practice and, in the long-run, 
show positive results in improving competences and skills of teachers, 
executive employees and pupils for the digital era and, concurrently, have 
the capacity of qualified innovative teachers and trainers, 
 Support pilot projects for 
o Spreading best practice in education,  
o Development and verification of digital skills and competences for 
the labour market in the digital era for teachers and non-
pedagogical and executive employees of schools and pupils and 
students, 
o Innovations of educational programmes and curricula at regional 
schools and study majors at universities for the sake of improving 
competences for the digital era and development of the personality 
for the information society, 
o Digital transformation of education and schools at all levels of 
education, 
 Support schools at all levels of education  
o Personal expert capacity (e.g. “digital coordinator” based on the 
practice of other EU Member States) and 
o Standard set of digital technologies with regard to the direction and 
vision of the schools from the viewpoint of education in: IoT, robotics, 
algorithmic thinking and programming, data science or virtual reality 
to support improvement of digital skills of teachers and competences 
of teachers for the digital era, 
o For this purpose, update the existing standards for financial 
contributions and technical standards for schools and school facilities, 
 At the national level, ensure systems for objectivised and transparent 
measurement and monitoring of the quality of education, improvement of 
digital skills and competences for the digital era and support system of 
quality management and self-assessment in educational institutions with 
regard to the needs of the labour market and the digital transformation. 
 
 28 
Recent surveys have shown: As many as 81.7% of pupils are not aware of risks 
connected to the use of the Internet. Approximately 10% of pupils can be 
considered dependent on digital technologies, because they spend more than 5 
hours per day with them. 77% of children use the Internet for “chatting” and, 
in communication with unknown persons, they do not know how to prevent 
possible misuse, they do not secure their own sensitive data and they are not 
sufficiently prepared to face hateful expressions, extreme radicalism, hoaxes, 
“fake news” etc. Reducing the quality of digital skills of pupils and students in 
the field of security were confirmed by results of IT fitness testing in the 
sample app. 30 thousand respondents in 2018. In the preparation of the 
Programme for Informatization of Education with the Outlook Until 2030 in 
strategic area VI. Security in the information space, we will: 
 Focus on competences and digital skills of young people leading to higher 
level of security on the Internet and in using digital technologies,  
 Adequately introduce and extend media literacy at primary and secondary 
schools, including critical thinking, learning about online well-being, 
mental health protection, personal data protection and skills for protecting 
oneself on the Internet, above all in the curriculum for civil education and 
ethics, 
 Map the current situation in education in the field of cyber security at all 
levels of education, including professional education and preparation of 
specialists,  
 Introduce innovated system in the field of cyber security and support 
research activity in the field of cyber security.  
In charge Ministry of Education 
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2019, continuously. The implementation of the measure has 
started. 
Source of funding  State budget / EU funds 
Main expected 
output  
Increase of digital competences of young people  
Reference Smart Industry Action Plan  
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No  
1.1.9 Initiating activities leading to assessment of impacts of the use of smart system and digital 
technologies on development, health and behaviour of people  
Description of the 
measure 
Digital technologies undoubtedly simplify and improve the quality of our lives 
in many aspects and, along with that, extend abilities of people in a manner that 
could not be even imaginable short time ago. On the other hand, there is an 
increasing number of voices from among experts, e.g. Royal College of 
Paediatrics and Child Health, American Academy of Paediatrics, neurologists or 
tech insiders13, who warn of negative effects directly or indirectly resulting from 
inadequate or irresponsible use of digital technologies on health and development 
of people. Attention is also paid to analysing the impact of smart systems on 
behaviour of people as such with focus on cognitive, social and emotional and 
decision-making abilities14. Due to severity of the claims, it is necessary to 
examine and professionally review their justness and, subsequently, evaluate the 
need to adopt appropriate measures. Therefore, the proposal is to: 
 
                                                     
 
13 See: https://www.aap.org/en-us/about-the-aap/aap-press-room/Pages/American-Academy-of-Pediatrics-Announces-New-
Recommendations-for-Childrens-Media-Use.aspx, https://www.rcpch.ac.uk/resources/health-impacts-screen-time-guide-clinicians-parents, 
https://eduworld.sk/cd/jaroslava-konickova/4666/neurolog-stransky-technologie-rozhovor, http://www.tristanharris.com/the-need-for-a-new-
design-ethics/ 
14 https://ec.europa.eu/jrc/communities/en/community/humaint 
 29 
 Set up an expert team composed of experts with relevant qualification and 
experience, 
 Analyse available knowledge from surveys and studies from abroad dealing 
with the impact of the use of smart systems and technologies on 
development, health and behaviour of people, 
 Map the use of smart systems and digital technologies by various groups of 
inhabitants, in particular, not limited to, focus on children and the youth, 
 Cooperate with foreign and international institutions and personalities 
involved in the aforementioned research and removal or mitigation of 
negative effects of the use of smart system and technologies on development 
and behaviour of people, 
  Prepare, verify and deploy humanocentric principles in planning, designing, 
deploying and operation of smart systems and a digital technology,  
 If necessary, confirm negative effects of negative impacts of smart systems 
and digital technologies on development, health or behaviour of people and 
provide suitable recommendations for their mitigation or removal, including 
building awareness of adequate and correct use of digital technologies and 
smart systems, e.g. in the form of guidelines for appropriate use of digital 
technologies. 
In charge Ministry of Health in cooperation with ODPMII 
Deadline / duration / 
measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2019, continuously. The implementation of the measure has not 
started yet. 
Source of funding  State budget / EU funds  
Main expected 
output  
Analysis 
Reference No  
Dependence on other 
AP measures 
No  
  
1.2  Modernization and opening of the labour market  
 
Ambition  
The ambition is to adjust rules of the labour market to the digital era and, if necessary, analyse 
the possibility of reviewing social insurance of employees in the platform economy if it is 
determined that the legislation of the Slovak republic is insufficient in this field. We will 
significantly simplify the possibility to acquire best experts from abroad for needs of innovative 
companies and research institutions. 
Regulation  
1.2.1 Making employment of IT specialists in state and public administration more attractive  
 
Description of the 
measure 
Human capacities in state administration must be extended with talented 
experts in digital, information and communication technologies. In a broader 
sense, it is important to open state administration in Slovakia also for graduates 
and experts in various aspects of economy and young professionals, which 
was also subject-matter of the Strategy for human resources management in 
state administration for 2015 -2020, in which the Office of Government (OG) 
undertook to perform comprehensive change of the system of remuneration of 
state employees. Therefore, the OG is preparing the Concept of remuneration 
dealing with the new system of remuneration from the viewpoint of financial 
and non-financial benefits in state administration.  
 30 
In order to attract selected groups of experts to state administration, it is 
necessary to make the conditions of employment more attractive, in particular 
the financial reward. Increasing compensations of selected highly qualified 
positions can be achieved not only by the aforementioned change of the 
remuneration system but also by supporting existing institutes, such as 
personal salaries15.  
Besides financial remuneration, there are also other, non-financial features 
relevant for motivation, such as flexible working hours, working from 
home/home office, etc. those are benefits that are currently regulated in the 
Act on state service as well as in the Labour Code, however, their higher level 
of awareness and implementation in practice are required. This aspect must be 
enhanced especially at informal level, by means of education and 
methodological guidance. The OG is currently preparing an analysis of 
financial and non-financial benefits that will form part of the Concept of 
remuneration which will also include is such strengthening of non-financial 
institutes and benefits in state service. 
In charge Office of the Government in cooperation with the MF SR  
Deadline / duration 
/ measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2021. Implementation of the measure has started. 
Source of funding  State budget / EU funds 
Main expected 
output  
Concept of remuneration in state administration  
Reference Strategy for human resources management in state administration for 2015 -
2020 
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No  
1.2.2 Support to acquiring talents for study and employment of experts from abroad, including 
universities and industry  
Description of the 
measure 
When preferring employment of our top experts, we will also support 
acquiring talents and highly qualified labour force from other countries, 
as part of adopted strategic documents in the field of migration, 
integration and labour mobility of foreign nationals. For this purpose, 
we need to set conditions for study and employment of citizens of EU 
Member States as well as citizens from countries outside of the EU (e.g. 
by means of implementing the system of blue cards). We will support 
joint study majors of Slovak universities with selected countries outside 
the EU as well as bilaterally beneficial controlled mobility for Slovakia 
and the other country. The procedure for arranging study at Slovak 
secondary schools and universities for potentially promising young 
students and job permits for highly qualified experts from abroad must 
be fast and no demanding on effort and means of the applicant. The 
current legislation makes it possible to hire foreign experts to state 
service and public service. There is also high demand for simplifying 
and streamlining the process of hiring foreign researchers at Slovak 
universities or initiating cross-border cooperation. 
In charge Ministry of Labour in cooperation with the Ministry of Education, Ministry of 
Interior, Ministry of Economy and the ODPMII 
Deadline / duration 
/ measure 
implementation /  
30 June 2020. Implementation of the measure has already started. 
                                                     
 
15 Personal salaries are defined in §129 of Act No. 55/2017 Coll. and §7a of Act No. 553/2003. 
 31 
Source of funding  State budget  
Main expected 
output  
Change of policies for employing experts from third countries, in particular in 
ICT  
Reference Digital Transformation Strategy for Slovakia 2030, Smart Industry Action 
Plan  
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No 
 
  
 32 
2. We will set up the basis for modern digital and data economy and for 
the digital transformation of economy in general  
Strategic objective “We will set up the basis for modern digital and data economy and for the digital 
transformation of economy in general” consists of four themes: 
2.1  Data economy  
2.2  Innovation ecosystem 
2.3  Smart mobility 
2.4  Financial innovations (FinTech) 
Slovakia will become a dynamic data economy in the EU. The legislation setting will enable 
application of new business models built on digital platforms and artificial intelligence in practice. 
Slovak companies will thus employ an increasing number of data analysts. It is possible to expect that 
newly established innovations will be further exported inside the digital single market. We will adopt 
and introduce systemic assessment of the impact of regulations on innovations and digital economy. We 
will modernise and simplify the legislative framework in the field of data in a way to make Slovakia a 
sample country for further regulation in the EU. We will ensure sufficient quantity of high-quality data 
in priority sectors for the needs of artificial intelligence and we will set the rules in a wat that will make 
the data economy trustworthy for the public.  
We will support innovation capacity and introduction of solutions built on artificial intelligence, 
in particular, at the level of SMEs. Therefore, we will set up a network of digital innovation centres and 
improve possibilities of cooperation with the academic sector in applied research in the field of artificial 
intelligence, which is significantly based on source data. At the same time, we will support new business 
models in the digital economy, in order to make conditions in Slovakia for the rise of platforms 
transforming standard sectors, such as transport, finance, health care and education. It means setting up 
“regulatory sandboxes”, introducing “future-proof regulations” and redesigning permits for the needs 
of the digital era. 
We will prepare preconditions for testing autonomous vehicles: Slovakia must not lag behind in 
testing autonomous vehicles and other new features in the V4 region. It means that we ned sufficient 
infrastructure, in particular a comprehensive system to support testing and functioning ecosystem of 
public, private and academic institutions. We want to be a country where it will be possible to test new 
business models in transport. The goal is to make Slovakia a place suitable for establishing services 
based on processing of data from transport, for testing new platforms. We will design transport policies 
and handle transport problems based on data processing. It will be necessary to create an ecosystem of 
partners that will be able to perform different tasks in testing and introducing autonomous transport. 
They are important in regulation that will make it possible for innovative companies to bring new 
solutions in the field of transport platforms. Those platforms need high quality data, in particular, precise 
map records. Testing of autonomous vehicles and building infrastructure must be a part of the national 
research and development. 
Innovations in the financial sector will be tested in Slovakia: The Centre for financial innovation has 
already launched an innovation laboratory and we will significantly enhance its capacities. We will take 
steps to have the possibilities for experimental verification of regulations in the field of financial 
innovations tested in the near future and to get the possibility of regulation of collective financing 
analysed. It is also possible to expect benefits from setting of the system for so called tokenization of 
assets. 
2.1 Data economy  
Data is precious source for creating value in data economy and it is considered to be a catalyst of 
economic growth and innovations in all sectors of economy. Smart devices and sensors collect 
increasingly more intimate information about location and lifestyle, devices in the Internet of Things 
record your voice when you control them and send it for analysis to remote data centres. Quantifiable 
value of applications using personal data in Europe is estimated at 1 000 billion euros per year until 
2020. For Slovak citizens, it means around 5.5 billion euros per year, which is currently around 7% of 
 33 
the GDP. A more precise definition of data economy is provided in a study for the Commission titled 
European Data Market SMART 2013/006, prepared by IDC (data is applicable as of October 2016). 
Data will become the basis for new smart services adjusted to needs of their users. Fostering 
demand of the public sector, favourable regulatory environment and investing funds into supporting 
research and innovations upon proposal of new algorithms and services stimulates development of data 
economy and artificial intelligence solutions.  
Slovakia subscribes to the opinion that, primarily, it is necessary to design functional mechanism for 
enforcing rules. We support setting up functional pan-European regulatory mechanism of the data 
economy: ranging from suitable method of market monitoring and filing proposals (for example, by 
making use of collective financing instruments) up to improvement of enforcement thanks to extension 
of powers if existing regulatory bodies and introduction of coordination among involved players. 
Ambition 
Slovakia will become a dynamic data economy in the European single market, it will have effective 
regulation of the telecommunications market and comprehensive gigabit fibre connection. 
Legislation will enable application of new business models based on platforms and artificial 
intelligence. The economy will also generate sufficient demand for innovative solutions in order 
to be able to maintain sufficient market and generate innovations. Slovak companies will thus be 
hiring a growing number of data analysts. It is possible to expect that the new innovations will be 
exported in the digital single market and beyond. 
Regulation 
2.1.1 Increasing effectiveness of the regulation of electronic communications market for the 
benefit of growing coverage of the territory with ultra-fast connection  
Description of the 
measure 
An inevitable precondition of the digital transformation and building of the 
information society is existence of sufficiently robust, secure and functioning 
high-speed communication infrastructure (fibre networks as the basis for new 
generation mobile and fixed networks), which will enable permanent 
connection of all systems, their mutual communication and, of course, their 
effective management and supervision. Building up electronic communication 
networks is the policy of the state, EU and it is in the public benefit; the 
authority in charge of it is the Ministry of Transport. Therefore, Slovakia 
should make effective use of all regulatory tools it has at its disposal. Among 
the measure that help in the short-term are: legislative amendments and 
increased pressure of the regulator in order to support sharing existing 
infrastructure and, subsequently, for the benefit of faster, more effective and 
seamless building of fibre networks, for the viewpoint of both, electronic 
communication legislation and the legislation for territorial planning and 
construction.  
 
Equally, it will be important to establish conditions for effective cooperation 
of telecommunications companies in the build-up of the infrastructure in order 
to prevent double parallel coverage. It will be necessary to create an Atlas of 
passive infrastructure and ensure effective operation of the Unified information 
point, in particular adherence to rules by all stakeholders. 
Shortcomings of the current situation: 
 Insufficient support from public administration authorities to electronic 
communication companies for building infrastructure (e.g. fibre networks). 
 Insufficient effective cooperation of electronic communication companies 
in building infrastructure (e.g. fibre networks). 
 Insufficient coverage by high-speed infrastructure in areas with lower 
density of households (where providers of fibre coverage face financial 
limitations). 
 Double coverage of territory with electronic communication infrastructure 
by several companies. 
 34 
 Need for effective cooperation and use of saved resources for the benefit 
of uncovered areas,  
 Construction legislation that will enable ambiguous interpretation of 
conditions for construction of new fibre infrastructure or modernisation of 
existing infrastructure,  
 Insufficient coordination and definition of competences among state 
administration authorities and local government in application of the 
legislation and national strategies for building digital infrastructure.  
 
Building gigabit fibre infrastructure is an important precondition for 
development of national economy. To achieve it, it is necessary to support 
construction and sharing of infrastructure also by means of adequate primary 
and secondary legislation. Moreover, Slovakia is facing the task of setting the 
regulatory environment to enable deployment of 5G mobile networks. 
Wireless 5G networks, together with fibre networks, will crucial in order to 
continue providing new electronic communications services, effective 
development of the Internet of Things, autonomous transport, smart transport 
systems and thus they will continue to solution of many problems that cities, 
citizens and businesses are facing. 
In charge Ministry of Transport in cooperation with the Ministry of Environment  
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2020, annually  
Source of funding  No additional expenditures are expected  
Main expected 
output  
Legislation amendment  
Reference Directive (EU) 2018/1972 of the European Parliament and the Council of 11 
December 2018 establishing the European Electronic Communications Code  
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No 
2.1.2 Support to completion of the build-up of gigabit fibre connection accessible in the sense of 
the EU strategy for European Gigabit Society  
Description of the 
measure 
Slovakia should continue in investments to ultra-fast connection by means of 
investment plans of commercial entities everywhere which connection is 
missing. However, it is possible to expect that in geographically difficult areas, 
where the costs per covered household exceed profitability limit, the 
commercial market will not build the coverage. In such areas, it will be 
necessary to intervene and use EU funds for development of the infrastructure 
of electronic communications in order to support the market and provide access 
to ultra-fast broadband services to all Slovak citizens. Such funds can support 
the development of the market of optic fibre providers and ensure access to 
funds they need in order to extend the ultra-fast broadband connection to areas 
with low commercial potential.  
Shortcomings of the existing condition: 
 Unmapped coverage of Slovak households with ultra-fast broadband 
services to the level of addresses. 
 No public consultation about commercial plans of operators concerning 
further build-up of the coverage with ultra-fast broadband connection in 
the following years. 
 No national plan for the broadband access in Slovakia. 
Build-up of the gigabit fibre infrastructure is an important precondition of 
development of the national economy exactly in line with goals of the EU 
strategy for gigabit society. In order to achieve the above goals, it is necessary 
to prepare the national plan of broadband access in Slovakia; the authority in 
charge of it is the Ministry of Transport. The national plan will specify strategic 
milestones in Slovakia that will be met in the time horizon until 2027 and 
 35 
propose the optimum way hot to harmonise commercial plans of telco 
operators and government interventions everywhere it is necessary to support 
the market in order to achieve goals of the EU gigabit society. It is subject to 
collection of relevant data about current coverage of Slovakia and commercial 
plans of operators that is currently being prepared by the ODPMII. 
In charge ODPMII in cooperation with the Ministry of Transport  
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2020, annually 
Source of funding  EU funds 
Main expected 
output  
National plan for the broadband access in Slovakia  
Reference EU Strategy for Gigabit Society. 
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
2.1.1 and 2.1.3 
2.1.3 Support to measures from the 5G for Europe Action Plan and 5G Roadmap from z Tallinn 
to have one big city covered with 5G until 2020 
Description of the 
measure 
5G is the main tool for all future digital services and, therefore, it is one of the 
priorities of the digital single market. Besides growing demand on the 
connection on the part of media applications, a trouble-free, shared fixed and 
wireless infrastructure with an offer of various levels of adjustable reliability 
and quality of services, depending on specific operational needs, will also be 
required for professional communication in industries and services such as 
automobile industry, transport, manufacturing, health care as well as next 
generation security and rescue services. 5G networks will form the backbone 
for a broad range of services necessary for functioning of the Eu internal 
market and they will also be inevitable for operation of vitally important social 
and economic functions such as energy, transport, banking and health care and 
industrial controlling system. In order to introduce 5G, the Commission 
adopted the 5G for Europe Action Plan. At the same time, it set a clear goal in 
its vision – to have at least one city covered with 5G technologies in each 
Member State until 2020. The 5G technology also belongs to central elements 
of the Commission Strategy for Gigabit Society. 
Building pilot 5G networks for commercial use is, similarly to building 
networks of lower generations, fully in hands of mobile telecommunications 
operators. It is possible to expect that, equally to the build-up of 4G networks, 
some operators building the first commercial 5G networks will decide to take 
over their competitors and demonstrate their technological leadership and 
launch testing operation of the 5G network earlier. However, primarily, it is 
relevant to those mobile operators that have received licences for the available 
frequency spectrum.  
Currently, there is no 5G in Slovakia. The government is aware that a vital 
prerequisite for development of this technology is coordinated and timely 
release of the 700 MHz bandwidth along with recently assigned frequency 
range of 3.6 GHz (3.4 – 3.8 GHz).  
Another difficulty is discussion and open issues concerning building up safe 
5G networks not only in national but also in European context. 
Operation of such networks will require building safe infrastructure based on 
credible components confirmed in the certification process. 
In charge ODPMII in cooperation with the Ministry of Transport, Regulatory Authority 
for Electronic Communications and Postal Services and the National Security 
Authority will support activities of operators in order to reach that goal  
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2020, annually  
 36 
Source of funding  No additional expenditure is expected  
Main expected 
output  
Providing availability of harmonised frequency spectrum for 5G, coverage of 
at least one place with the 5G technology 
Reference 5G for Europe Action Plan, 5G Road Map form Tallinn. 
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
2.1.1 and 2.1.2 
Organisation 
2.1.4 Setting up the institute for providing access to trustworthy data  
Description of the 
measure 
The Institute for providing access to trustworthy data is, at the time of this 
Action Plan, a new, non-separate structural unit of existing Data Office 
Department. The role of this unit is to set processes for such publication of 
public administration data that can subsequently be used by third parties to 
create applications and, at the same time, if necessary and in the case of 
disputes, it will be possible to demonstrate what data was published at what 
time.  The activities will also include active communication for disclosing 
priority datasets whose priority results from: 
 Regular surveys of the public demand carried out by the Office of 
Plenipotentiary of the Government of the Slovak Republic for 
Development of the Civil Society (resulting from resolution of the 
Government of the Slovak Republic No. 104/2017 on the Action Plan 
of the Initiative for open governance for 2017-2019), 
 New directive of the Commission on open data that defines so called 
High Value Datasets, 
 Practice and focus of the government towards data economy and 
functioning of the so called “data driven” state by means of: territorial 
datasets 
 And Land Register, datasets on transport, transport flows and precise 
maps, datasets on providing health care and effectiveness of medical 
treatment, datasets on educational procedures, datasets on 
performance of public administration institutions. 
 
The current policy in the field of data economy includes publication of open 
data of the public administration (see also Strategy and Action Plan for 
providing access and using open public administration data). A disadvantage 
of data is that its further use is possible especially for information purposes and 
data values are not guaranteed for the legal use. Therefore, there will be a 
mechanism proposed and implemented that will make it possible, for selected 
datasets, to verify its validity, constancy and thus credibility. Credible open 
data will thus make it possible to set up automated processes for public sector 
data. 
In charge ODPMII 
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2020. The implementation of the measure has not started yet. 
Source of funding  EU funds 
Main expected 
output  
Public data trust  
Reference No 
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No 
Projects 
2.1.5 Deployment of a pilot solution for personal data administration  
Description of the 
measure 
A pilot solution of the Personal Information Management System (PIMS) will 
be deployed in the eGovernment environment.  The system will let citizens and 
 37 
businesses check any data recorded about them in different public 
administration systems from one spot. The principal intention of the project 
will be to select suitable technological solutions and standards that can get 
connected to data integration in the government cloud and confirm their 
applicability and scalability. Its extension to the whole database is planned, as 
well as adding the information about who accessed the data and on what 
grounds. 
In charge ODPMII 
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2021. The implementation of the measure has already started. 
Source of funding  EU funds  
Main expected 
output  
 
Reference National concept of public administration informatization. 
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No 
2.2 Innovation ecosystem  
Innovation ecosystem in Slovakia is still significantly lagging behind other EU countries. Inadequate 
ecosystem for supporting innovations has negative impact on the success and competitiveness of Slovak 
companies in the international market. The support should focus on all businesses. We must also support 
new business models so that Slovakia could serve as place of origin of platforms for new sectors 
supporting strengthening of the Slovak digital economy. Another big problem is also non-existence of 
digital innovation hub in Slovakia unlike absolute majority of other EU Member States.  
Digital economy requires modernisation of the legislative framework. Therefore, it is necessary to adopt, 
as soon as possible, new concepts on data (adopt Act on data) and review suitable possibilities and 
problems for regulation of artificial intelligence as well as enabling distributed solutions of trust built 
on the blockchain technology. One of the most important goals is establishing centres of digital 
innovations in Slovakia. 
Ambition 
The government will use suitable means to support development of digital economy based on data. 
We need to make important innovations occur directly in Slovakia, especially in the fie of artificial 
intelligence or other innovative technologies. We will regularly monitor and improve the effect of 
regulations on the digital economy in order to support innovative and business projects.  
Regulation 
2.2.1 Introduction of systemic evaluation of effects of regulations on innovations and digital 
economy 
Description of the 
measure 
Processes of evaluation of effects of regulations will be supported by 
information system that will enable modelling effect of regulations and, at the 
same time, monitor their actual effects after introducing the change into 
practice (IT platform for better regulation). It is important to engage the expert 
public and stakeholders in the process of preparation and reviews of policies 
and regulations by means of modern digital tools. The activity will also include 
prioritisation of key documents of legislative and non-legislative nature that 
will have to be thoroughly analysed for impact assessment and updated in order 
to reflect needs of development of the digital economy and remove 
bureaucratic burden of companies that is unjustified in the modern era. Re-
evaluation of the methodology of impact assessment on informatization of the 
society based on a unified methodology for assessing selected impacts on 
digitalization – Digital Impact Assessment (DIA) and extension of the 
methodology for assessing impacts on the business environment based on the 
unified methodology with the Innovation Impact Assessment (IIA) constitute 
 38 
parts of implementation of the RIA 2020 – Strategy for better regulation and 
its action plan. 
In charge Ministry of Economy in cooperation with the ODPMII 
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2021. The implementation of the measure has not started yet. 
Source of funding  EU funds  
Main expected 
output  
Modified methodologies for assessing impacts on informatization of the 
society and the business environment  
Reference RIA 2020 
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No 
2.2.2 Introduction of the system of goal oriented dynamic regulation 
Description of the 
measure 
Slovakia will support and apply the best European practices in the field of 
digital platform regulation and intermediaries in order to not threaten jobs and 
safety of consumers and to foster economy growth and positive innovations in 
the labour market that will to strengthening if the middle class. The concept of 
dynamic regulation (regulation resistant to future changes in the environment) 
makes it possible for affected entities to experiment and innovate procedures 
in order to achieve the expected goal of the regulation. Dynamic regulation 
thus does not prescribe any exact procedure of how to keep it and thus provides 
the business environment with more freedom. It is suitable especially for 
sectors that are developing very fast (e.g. platform economy, etc.). The 
proposed concept will be first tested as a pilot on objectively measurable target 
in a specified area. The proposed regulation will be tested using the concept of 
its experimental verification prior to its general deployment. As part of it, the 
government will propose a controlled experiment, where companies can 
operate in a new way legally, while employees of the state administration will 
evaluate results, consult consumers and market participants and thus acquire 
knowledge for broader initiatives16 The activity is part of implementation of 
the RIA 2020 – Strategy for better regulation and its action plan. 
In charge Ministry of Economy in cooperation with the ODPMII 
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
31 January 2021. The implementation of the measure has not started yet. 
Source of funding  EU funds 
Main expected 
output  
Preparation of principles of legislation resistant to future changes in the 
environment  
Reference RIA 2020 
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No 
Organisation  
2.2.3 Support to new business models in the digital economy, identifying of segments for the 
platform economy and extension of the portfolio of activities of the Slovak Investment Holding  
Description of the 
measure 
New business models can be used to put developed technologies into practice 
and push through their broad use. If the technology exists, a frequent reason of 
failure is disharmony between the regulatory framework and possibilities of 
such technology or the technology is limited by too small market. In order to 
push through such solutions better, it is necessary to offer them in the whole 
digital single market. Therefore, we will make systemic effort to enable 
experimental functioning of new business models, especially in transport, 
logistics, health care, education and financial services. At the same time, we 
                                                     
 
16 Scale-up Europe: A Manifesto for Change and Empowerment in the Digital Age http://scaleupeuropemanifesto.eu/ 
 39 
will study their possible disruptive nature. Slovakia can serve as an incubator 
of new possibilities with the vision of expansion to the whole EU.  
In this task, we will also analyse the role of online platforms in the Slovak 
market. In a comprehensive evaluation of the role of online platforms, we will 
look for answers to: 
 Transparency of search results (including paid links and ads), 
 The way how platforms use collected information,  
 Relations between platforms and suppliers,  
 Limitations of possibilities of individuals and businesses to change the 
platform,  
 How to best deal with illegal content on the Internet, 
 What is the influence of platforms on economic competition thanks to 
network effects and use of data and personal data to huge extent – digital 
platforms have much higher propensity to it compared to traditional 
businesses, 
 How platforms in collaborative economy transform the labour market and 
social insurance, 
 How platforms in collaborative economy change use of resources and 
responsibility,  
 How platforms support transition to circular economy.  
Subsequently, we will identify those segments of economy where platforms 
have biggest influence in Slovakia and where Slovak platforms have the 
biggest chance for success. Those segments will be paid increase attention in 
further tasks. 
We will use financial instruments in the Slovak Investment Holding for 
funding new business models in order to support a portfolio of projects in 
digital and data economy. 
In charge ODPMII in cooperation with the MF SR and the Ministry of Economy 
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2021. The implementation of the measure has not started yet. 
Source of funding  State budget / EU funds 
Main expected 
output  
Setting the state aid to support growth of the data economy. 
Reference No 
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No 
2.3 Smart mobility 
It is well known that Slovakia is one of global leaders in automobile production. However, Slovakia 
needs to be leader in both, manufacturing as well as in innovations in transport. Introducing smart 
transport policies constitutes an opportunity for Slovakia to support building R&D functions in existing 
companies and setting up new companies dealing with innovations and value-added activities. 
Therefore, it is desirable to have testing of autonomous and connected vehicles done directly in the 
territory of Slovakia. 
Even despite the fact that there are testing tracks in neighbouring countries and elsewhere, the testing 
map is still relatively sparse. Moreover, testing of self-driving vehicles in Europe, including countries 
like Germany and Great Britain, is still running very slowly. The main reason of a slower pace and a 
higher number of regulations is a higher stress on safety in order to avoid possible failures or accidents 
of self-driving cars, which has already happened in the USA. That fact improves the current 
unfavourable starting position of Slovakia in the field of self-driving testing. 
Slovakia has a unique geographical location and borders on all other countries of Visegrad Four as well 
as with Austria. The capital city is also favourably positioned, with close distance to Vienna, Budapest 
and Prague. No other V4 country has the same potential. It is the autonomous connection of capitals in 
Central Europe that is a huge investment attraction in the near future. So, thanks to its unique position, 
 40 
Slovakia can host a testing track connecting Bratislava with the Czech Republic, Austria and Hungary. 
Besides its unique location, Slovakia offers a broad range of geomorphological and climatic areas in a 
relatively small territory, which enables more effective testing and their higher variability. 
Slovakia hosts of four big car makers – Kia, Peugeot/Citroen, Jaguar/LandRover and Volkswagen with 
top level distribution network and secondary market – with possible arrival of others in the future. 
Therefore, there is huge concentration of technological know-how in Slovakia. Slovakia possesses 
unique technological infrastructure as it is currently the global leader in car manufacturing per capita as 
well as in the total number of manufactured vehicles per year and it is place of operation of several 
innovative technological companies and start-ups. 
Besides supporting new innovative projects and entities, the final objective of these activities is to get 
prepares for deployment of such innovations as the final effect of every innovation is supposed to be its 
implementation and use in everyday life. 
National project titled Improvement of public policies in transport, innovation capacity in transport and 
support to partnerships in deploying smart mobility has bene adopted and it is being implemented in 
partnership of the Ministry of Transport and the ODPMII.  
  
Ambition 
Slovakia wants to reach the level of other countries in the field of testing of self-driving cars and 
related infrastructure in V4 region in the horizon of the forthcoming years, while aspiring for a 
respected position in the EU. It means that we need sufficient infrastructure as well as 
comprehensive system (structure, legislation, procedures, knowledge) to support innovations in 
transport and functional cooperation of public, private and academic institutions. 
 Regulation 
2.3.1 Adoption of the national Strategy for Smart Mobility 
Description of the 
measure 
The strategy defines the priorities and content of the public policy for smart 
mobility. The method of building ITS in Slovakia will be determined with the 
emphasis on strategic understanding of self-driving cars testing and 
sophisticated transport services. The document also defines how to create 
functional partnership with private sector – it means how to support business 
entities to innovate in cooperation with the public sector also in more risk-
exposed areas. 
In charge Ministry of Transport 
Deadline / duration 
/ measure 
implementation /  
30 June 2020. The implementation of the measure has started. 
Source of funding  EU funds 
Main expected 
output  
Strategy for smart mobility 
Reference OP EPA project - Improvement of public policies in transport, innovation 
capacity in transport and support to partnerships in deploying smart mobility. 
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No  
2.3.2 Preparing draft concept of innovation public-private partnership for smart mobility 
solutions 
Description of the 
measure 
Methodology and procedures of the innovation partnership will be prepared 
and, based on them it will be possible to support building the testing 
environment and testing scenarios. 
In charge ODPMII  
Deadline / duration 
/ measure 
implementation /  
30 June 2020. The implementation of the measure has not started yet. 
Source of funding  EU funds 
 41 
Main expected 
output  
Methodology of innovation partnership  
Reference OP EPA project - Improvement of public policies in transport, innovation 
capacity in transport and support to partnerships in deploying smart mobility. 
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
2.3.1  
2.3.3 Preparing draft Action plan for deployment of smart mobility in the Slovak Republic 
Description of the 
measure 
The Action plan is supposed to outline definition of particular steps of the 
Strategy for smart mobility, including supporting its approval, communication 
and presentation. The Action plan will contain a standardized list of tasks 
using SMART methodology, i.e. all tasks will be clearly described, including 
their owner, target date, method of controlling and verification of the result, 
etc. The Action plan and definition of priorities will simplify and increase 
effectiveness of assignment of necessary activities with depending on top 
priorities and, subsequently, it will provide the basic framework for financial 
allocation for those activities. The Action plan and the list of tasks will reflect 
international commitments of the Slovak Republic and strategic documents at 
the level of the Commission and the Slovak Republic, including specification 
of responsibilities and necessary cooperation. 
In charge Ministry of Transport 
Deadline / duration 
/ measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2020. The implementation of the measure has not started yet. 
Source of funding  EU funds 
Main expected 
output  
Action plan for deployment of smart mobility in the Slovak Republic  
Reference OP EPA project - Improvement of public policies in transport, innovation 
capacity in transport and support to partnerships in deploying smart mobility  
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
2.3.1  
2.3.4 Preparation of the legislation for testing and operation of self-driving vehicles  
Description of the 
measure 
Frameworks for necessary legislation changes will be proposed in order to 
adopt legislation in affected and relevant fields and the precise schedule of the 
legislation changes will be set. Legislation will be prepared for connected and 
self-driving vehicles, smart transport systems and associated topics, especially 
related to traffic safety and cyber security of vehicles and their components 
separately.  
In charge Ministry of Transport 
Deadline / duration 
/ measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2021. The implementation of the measure has not started yet. 
Source of funding  EU funds 
Main expected 
output  
Legislation draft  
Reference OP EPA project - Improvement of public policies in transport, innovation 
capacity in transport and support to partnerships in deploying smart mobility  
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
2.3.1 and 2.3.3.  
2.3.5 Preparing environment for experimental verification of the regulation for smart mobility 
Description of the 
measure 
Experimental verification of the regulation prior to its general deployment will 
make it possible to test procedural and structural definition of innovative 
management of changes. Thus, it is a mechanism to generate effective 
regulations that will also keep the fast pace and continuously developed 
innovations. 
 42 
In this process, there will be rules, tools and processes for verification of the 
regulation for smart mobility developed that will bring about better regulation 
in transport and experimenting with new setting of rules. Verifying proposed 
regulation will serve institutions and public administration entities in setting 
rules, processes and tools of regulations. 
In charge Ministry of Transport  
Deadline / duration 
/ measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2021. The implementation of the measure has not started yet. 
Source of funding  EU funds 
Main expected 
output  
Establishing experimental verification of the regulation prior to its deployment  
Reference OP EPA project - Improvement of public policies in transport, innovation 
capacity in transport and support to partnerships in deploying smart mobility  
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
2.3.4 
Organisation 
2.3.6 Performance of activities of the platform for smart mobility as the “Smart mobility lab” 
Description of the 
measure 
Smart mobility lab will serve as the model platform for coordination, 
implementation and demonstration of innovative solutions for smart transport 
that will provide scientists with the possibility to perform experiments and test 
innovations for autonomous transport before they will be implemented into 
actual vehicles and actual traffic. In the Smart mobility lab, scientists will be 
developing and testing smart transport solutions in simulated transport 
situations with autonomous model vehicles, wireless communication network 
and positioning system based on infrared cameras. Depending on the demand 
on the part of scientists, there will be high precision maps prepared for selected 
locations for the purposes of autonomous mobility testing. Thus, the Smart 
mobility lab is the room for testing (near) future transport solutions. The 
platform will propose innovations in the field of transport, coordinate 
deployment of innovations and set principles and rules of operation of the 
ecosystem to support and scale innovations. Equally, it will create conditions 
and enable innovation partnerships between public, private and academic 
sectors in order to support innovations in transport. 
In charge Ministry of Transport in cooperation with the ODPMII 
Deadline / duration 
/ measure 
implementation /  
30 June 2021. The implementation of the measure has already started. 
Source of funding  EU funds 
Main expected 
output  
Establishment of the platform for smart mobility 
Reference OP EPA project - Improvement of public policies in transport, innovation 
capacity in transport and support to partnerships in deploying smart mobility   
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
2.3.1, 2.3.3 and 2.3.4  
2.3.7 Reviewing possibilities of institutional support to self-driving cars testing 
Description of the 
measure 
We will introduce so called “One stop shop” to provide solutions for testing 
of autonomous vehicles and smart mobility. It is the place that will concentrate 
information for active support to target groups. It means that the innovative 
entity will receive information about standards, methodologies, legislation, 
forms of testing as well as the form of available financial aid in one spot. We 
will set the process of licencing for connected and self-driving cars that can be 
either in the stage of pre-commercial marketing or as fully licenced vehicles 
 43 
for ordinary traffic) in line with the high level of cyber security. Reviewing 
possibilities of setting up the national operator for self-driving cars testing that 
will guarantee and coordinate tests at the one-stop-shop. 
In charge Ministry of Transport  
Deadline / duration 
/ measure 
implementation /  
30 June 2021. The implementation of the measure has not started yet. 
Source of funding  EU funds 
 
Main expected 
output  
Setting up the contact point  
Reference OP EPA project - Improvement of public policies in transport, innovation 
capacity in transport and support to partnerships in deploying smart mobility  
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
2.3.1, 2.3.4 a 2.3.5  
Projects 
2.3.8 Introduction of selected innovation pilot concepts in transport, so called Proof of Concept 
Description of the 
measure 
In the first step, the measure will consist of pilot testing – so called Proof of 
Concept – selected innovations in the field of smart mobility in order to 
acquire knowledge necessary for the future setting of supporting financial 
mechanisms for implementation of projects in the field of smart mobility. In 
the second step, selected innovation concepts in transport will be deployed. 
Such pilot testing and deployment of innovations concepts will be limited in 
time and space, such as testing of certain aspects of connected and self-driving 
vehicles, the concept of smart crossing and the use of innovative tools for 
collection of traffic information. One of possible areas for testing the Proof of 
Concepts is the use of more precise maps or several types of maps in the 
territory of the test and evaluation of their suitability for application in the 
territory of the Slovak Republic, testing of cross-border automated exchange 
of traffic information, for example, for cars driving from the Czech Republic 
to the Slovak Republic, processing of data from cars with higher level of 
autonomy in steering and their use for smart transport systems, e.g. in the 
Smart City concept or for continuous improvement of maps, etc. 
In charge Ministry of Transport  
Deadline / duration 
/ measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2021. The implementation of the measure has not started yet. 
Source of funding  EU funds 
Main expected 
output  
Deployment of selected innovation concepts in transport  
Reference OP EPA project - Improvement of public policies in transport, innovation 
capacity in transport and support to partnerships in deploying smart mobility 
y  
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
2.3.1, 2.3.4, 2.3.5   
2.4 Financial innovations (FinTech) 
Innovations are increasingly expressed also in the field of financial services. We can conclude that 
utilisation of technologically advanced procedures and systems fundamentally changes the manner of 
providing of financial services by financial institutions as well as utilisation of the services by end users.  
Speed and intensity of the technological development in the field of FinTech leads to occurrence of 
innovative business models that do not always fall under the existing legal framework. The valid 
legislative framework for doing business in the financial market is, to large extent, harmonised by Eu 
regulations, which are continuously creating room for also innovative business (e.g. PSD2). Slovak 
institutions dealing with regulation and supervision over the financial market are involved in discussions 
 44 
as well as in practical steps at the level of the European Commission, European Central Bank and 
European supervision authorities leading to updating the regulation, licencing and supervision 
processes. Our goal is to analyse opportunities to update processes and regulatory environment at the 
national level in line with applicable European legal framework in order to ensure financial stability and 
consumer protection and, at the same time, to use the high potential of the added value of new 
technologies on the real economy. 
Even now, there are newly established companies as well existing companies operating in the financial 
market trying to use that potential by means of their innovative business models. Regions and entire 
countries are trying to set up the best possible conditions for occurrence and arrival of innovative 
companies. An incentive for such support in our country should be the effort to accelerate transition to 
digitalised economy and, at the same time, increasing the competitiveness of the Slovak Republic in 
global economy.  
FinTech, as an integral industry, is still in the process of formation and, therefore, it is important for our 
economy to deal with the support to innovation in this field in a comprehensive manner already at its 
origin. In the long run, Slovakia has provided the room for foreign companies to test innovative financial 
technologies. If we add good availability of internet connection, high share of population using financial 
services and willingness to try innovations, Slovakia is a country with high potential to absorb as well 
as produce new innovative products and services and attract innovative companies from abroad.  
In this connection, it will be desirable to focus capacities of the MF SR (and the National Bank of 
Slovakia) to support development of innovations in Slovak economy and thus set up the Centre for 
financial innovations. Since March 2018, the Centre for financial innovations has served as the platform 
for discussions between the MF SR, National Bank of Slovakia and other central state administration 
bodies and market participants about needs in introducing financial innovations. The Centre for financial 
innovations has set its goal to discuss the general progress in the field of financial innovations. At the 
European level, the Centre is operating by means of the Financial unit of the Permanent Representation 
of the Slovak Republic at the EU.  
 
Ambition  
Slovakia has the potential to become a regional leader in the field of financial innovations. It is 
our ambition to create environment that will support Slovak as well as foreign innovative 
companies in the financial market. This goal can be achieved by setting suitable regulatory 
environment where market participants meet regulators in an open discussion and try to set up 
procedures and platforms for providing services in the financial sector meeting all preconditions 
for ensuring high quality, effectiveness and financial stability. That will also support sharing 
experience and information among all relevant entities in deploying innovative solutions, services 
and products in the financial market. By means of the Centre for financial innovations, the MF 
SR should play the key role in setting cooperation and communication in the field of financial 
innovations with the goal of establishing competitive entrepreneurial environment.  
Support to financial innovations will also require extension of education in the field of financial 
innovations, which is the basic prerequisite for development of the field in Slovakia. At the same 
time, it is possible to use specialised platforms, such as the Centre for financial innovations or 
events dedicated to innovations in order to increase awareness of the latest trends. 
Even at present, we can observe the trend of increasing openness to financial innovations and their 
use on everyday basis. Clients themselves look for new technologies and request them from their 
banks or insurance companies. Thus, the purpose of the Centre for financial innovations is to 
enable financial institutions to focus on progressive procedures, remove undesirable obstacles in 
their deployment and maintain high level of protection of Slovak financial market with its 
simultaneous transition to the digitalized future. 
Organisation 
We must provide more detailed and comprehensible information to parties looking for information about 
doing business and about deployment of innovative products and services in the Slovak financial market.  
 45 
2.4.1 Evaluation of activities of the NBS Innovation Hub 
Description of the 
measure 
The MF SR, by means of the Centre for financial innovations, initiated 
establishment of the innovation hub in the Slovak Republic. The National Bank 
of Slovakia (NBS) set up, in April 2019, an innovation hub that serves as the 
contact point with sufficient information about financial innovations and 
regulatory requirements for their deployment for relevant entities of the 
financial market. The establishment and functionalities of the innovation hub 
were inspired by approaches of other European countries. The NBS Innovation 
Hub consists of the website with basic information about financial innovations 
and online questionnaire for application for use of the Innovation hub. The 
objective is to get as much information from a company as possible about its 
intended innovation products and services. Afterwards, the NBS, in 
cooperation with the MF SR, will organise a meeting with the company that 
contacted the NBS using the questionnaire. The number of meetings is not 
limited to one, there can be more of them depending on needs of a particular 
company, the NBS or the Ministry. Meetings will result in information about 
regulatory requirements for the selected type of business activity. 
Approximately one year after setting up the Innovation Hub, it will be 
necessary to perform an analysis of its functioning and possibilities for its 
improvement and connection to the Centre for financial innovations. 
In charge NBS in cooperation with the MF SR  
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
30 April 2020. The implementation of the measure has already started. 
Source of funding  No additional expenditure is expected  
Main expected 
output  
Evaluation of activities of the NBS Innovation Hub 
Reference No 
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No  
2.4.2 Enhancement of the activity and position of the Centre for financial innovations  
Description of the 
measure 
In order to enhance activity and position of the Centre for financial 
innovations, it is desirable to allocated sufficient capacities of the MF SR to 
ensure and increase effectiveness of operative, expert, promotional and 
educational activities of the Centre for financial innovations. 
The Centre for financial innovations, as a platform for discussions of public 
administration authorities and the private sector, carried a lot of activities in 
2018 and their number will even increase in 2019 and in the following years. 
The goal is to coordinate the support of financial innovations among 
participants of the process, i.e. government, existing financial institutions and 
newly set up companies and connect such entities with each other and the 
academic sector. In the future, the key important factor will be the academia, 
together with promotion of financial innovations and their awareness. At the 
same time, the centre identifies topics and areas for work of dedicated working 
groups. The work of working groups will continue also in the following period 
– with connection to goals contained in this Action Plan. Enhancement of 
activities and position of the Centre for financial innovations is an important 
precondition in order to cover the aforementioned activities and enable its work 
to cover both, current financial innovations as well as those that will result 
from the future progress.  
In charge MF SR 
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
30 June 2020, continuously. The implementation of the measure has already 
started. 
Source of funding  No additional expenditure is expected  
 46 
Main expected 
output  
Establishment of a structural unit at the MF SR – Centre for financial 
innovations  
Reference No  
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No  
Projects 
2.4.3 Analysing benefits and possible utilisation of the regulatory sandbox concept  
Description of the 
measure 
We will analyse benefits and possible utilisation of the concept of the 
regulatory sandbox or all preconditions for its establishment, including 
amendments to existing legislation. Sandbox is, by its concept, a follow-up of 
the project of innovation hub in the stage before or after granting the licence to 
a financial institution but prior to the full deployment of the product or service. 
The principal prerequisite for the regulatory sandbox is defining clear 
conditions for participation in testing of the innovative solution in practice on 
a small sample of users or in a limited set of data. In this mode, the entity is 
able to test proposed solution and, in close cooperation with the supervisory 
body, finetune its future use in line with existing regulation. The concept also 
provides the supervisory body and the regulator with additional information on 
implications and effects of the technological solution on the financial market 
and enables proactive identification and elimination of possible risks.  
The analysis will result in the decision about suitability or unsuitability of the 
regulatory sandbox concept, or other types of sandboxes, in the Slovak 
financial market. 
In charge MF SR in cooperation with the NBS 
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2020. The implementation of the measure has already started. 
Source of funding  No additional expenditure is expected  
Main expected 
output  
Analysis 
Reference No 
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No  
2.4.4 Analysing needs for crowdfunding regulation 
Description of the 
measure 
We will analyse the needs for regulation of the investment and lending 
crowdfunding in the Slovak Republic. Crowdfunding can be considered a part 
of the so-called alternative financing. The reason for that is the development 
of the market in preceding years in Slovakia, in both, its investment part 
(crowdinvesting) as well as in lending (crowdlending/peer-to-peer lending). 
Unregulated environment can be risky for investors that invest into 
crowdfunding platforms as well as for their clients who acquire money using 
them for projects or ordinary expenses. Proportional regulation could be 
suitable also in order to prevent undesired situations from the past in non-
banking lending, when the absence of the regulatory framework threatened end 
users and enabled unfair practices on the part of providers of money.  
The result of the analysis should serve as the basis for decision-making on 
possible regulation of crowdfunding or measures to make existing applicable 
legal framework transparent and ensure more certainty and protection of users 
as well as investors in this field.  
In charge MF SR in cooperation with the NBS 
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2020. The implementation of the measure has already started. 
Source of funding  No additional expenditure is expected  
 47 
Main expected 
output  
Analysis 
Reference No  
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No  
2.4.5 Analysing possible utilisation of tokenization of assets  
Description of the 
measure 
We will analyse possible utilisation of tokenization of assets that is understood 
as a recent trend in the financial and non-financial market. In the past years, 
tokenization has made it possible, worldwide, to build a new and growing 
channel for inflow of funds to real economy. Tokenization of assets represents 
new possibilities of investing savings to industries that had been inaccessible 
to ordinary investors until then. One example is tokenization of works of art 
with virtual division of the work of art int smaller parts (i.e. tokens), which can 
be acquired by the general public. Tokenization can be used in all fields of 
economy, not only in the financial sector. Regulation of this sector already 
exists in Switzerland, Estonia and Malta. The role of the analysis will be to 
make a detailed examination of possible benefits and risks of tokenization as 
an alternative funding of real economy. The analysis should result in 
information basis for responsible decision making about possible regulation of 
tokenization in Slovak legislation. 
In charge MF SR 
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
30 June 2020. The implementation of the measure has already started. 
Source of funding  No additional expenditure is expected  
Main expected 
output  
Analysis 
Reference No  
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No  
 
  
 48 
3. We will improve abilities of the public administration to innovate 
and use data for the benefit of citizens  
Strategic objective “We will improve abilities of the public administration to innovate and use data for 
the benefit of citizens” consists of two topics: 
3.1 Data in the public administration, 
3.2 Innovation in the public administration. 
We will launch implementation of the “data-driven state” concept: The intention requires a 
significant improvement of the use and processing of data for analytical purposes by public 
administration institutions so that the public administration could provide high quality services and the 
government could adopt decisions on the basis of best knowledge that is available. Our institutions must 
know how to use data in real life and enable decision making on the basis of the data. Such change in 
operation of the public administration will require steps at all levels of the public administration; such 
assumed change will require political backing and substantial technical capacities. The initiative will be 
centrally coordinated by the public administration data office that has been set up at the ODPMII. 
Frameworks will be designed at the central level; however, actual changes of institutions can be carried 
out at the local level. Therefore, the OPII will provide room for implementation of transformation 
projects supported by technologies such as artificial intelligence or blockchain. Pursuing this effort, it 
will be possible to implement projects in the new programme Digital Europe. 
Public administration will learn to innovate: We will significantly reduce the time for deploying 
innovations. Testing pilot solutions will become a common practice in the public administration. The 
innovation cycle of IT solutions must be rationalised by 2022. Experimenting, organizing competitions 
and engaging companies will become a standard feature of operation of public administration 
institutions. Therefore, we will reform and simplify principles of partnership with the academic and 
private sector. We expect a significant support to experimenting with technologies in the public 
administration and an overall change of the culture towards start-up like mindset and putting the 
“eGovernment as the platform” principle into practice, which means that innovation of public services 
can be also prepared by third parties, i.e. private sector or NGOs.  
3.1 Data in the public administration 
The first area where new innovations resulting from data economy could have actual impact is the public 
administration. The public administration is composed of a structure of institutions that try to perform 
their mission and assigned functions within the scope of clear competences. However, the progress in 
the 21st century wipes away once clear borders thanks to new layers of circumstances that originate in 
the digital era. Most public administration institutions can be significantly modernised using digital 
technologies and by a better use of data in every function. There is room for increasing the effectiveness 
while saving resources, especially thanks to better abilities to predict and plan. It means that institutions 
will get better adjusted to the current situation when there is huge quantity of data available on different 
economy sector and human activities but processes in institutions are still set as at the time when it was 
difficult to get access to the information. It means that it is possible to plan transition from bureaucratic 
organisation based on procedures and permits to a system that will be more flexible, agile and goal 
oriented. A substantial change can result in automation of public administration with proactive approach 
to citizens, which will lead to an improvement of the reputation of the public administration among 
citizens, savings of human and financial resources. Based on data available in information system of the 
public administration, citizens can be actively contacted or their requests can be verified and even 
completely handled automatically. 
There are three basic reasons why to be optimistic that results can be achieved in a short-term horizon:  
 Public administration institutions are not working at optimum level now. After the attempt to 
optimise processes, the current effort to improve analytical and decision-making abilities of 
institutions thanks to a better use of data is considered to be the best way how to achieve 
improvement and there are a low of reform initiatives that are being prepared as part of the OP 
EPA that are focused on improving the use of data in designing policies. 
 New technologies built on the use of data have brought significant accomplishment in the private 
sector. The main question is how to achieve similar success in the public administration too. There 
 49 
is a lot of successful experience from abroad that can be transferred. Also, thanks to the drop of 
public investments to IT in the past 3 years, we can observe a significant effort of IT sector to 
come with valuable solutions. 
 It is the competence of the public administration to initiate and mange assumed transformation, 
which can strongly help other sectors of the economy that can be inspired by proposed innovations 
and solutions. 
On the other hand, the government is facing several challenges in this field that will have to be handled 
effectively in order to make this transformation happen. In particular, it concerns:  
 Maintaining continuity of measures and activities, evaluation of the success of current EPA 
projects that must have actual impact. 
 The need to build human resources that understand new technologies and their possible 
applications.  
 Allocation of sufficient funds, either form the state budget or operational programmes to meet 
priorities in digital themes.  
 Insufficient stress on the setting and the design of eGovernment and online services to user 
friendly.  
Ambition  
Our ambition is to launch implementation of the “data-driven state” concept (state working on 
the basis of data use) into practice in the public administration in Slovakia. The intention requires 
a significant improvement of the use and processing of data for analytical purposes by public 
administration institutions. The public administration will adopt decisions based on its best 
available knowledge. Such transformation will require, along with the data lifecycle management 
(see preceding chapters), also a change of the method of decision-making in processes themselves, 
including processes that constitute the performance of the public administration. It is necessary 
to make sure that institutions know how to use real data and to make data based decision-making 
possible (and automated, where it is possible). It means creating conditions for the maximum use 
of the potential that can be exhausted from data. It also includes transformation of the functioning 
of organisations and processes in the public administration so that such analyses could be 
effectively used and, at the same time, published in suitable visual format for the public. We 
propose continuous deployment of fully automated public administration services. In this process, 
the system will handle filings automatically based on selected criteria. Applications will be verified 
on the basis of data maintained by the public administration, in ideal case, we will have fully 
proactive and chained services.  
Regulation 
3.1.1 Modernising and simplification of the legislation framework for data – preparation of the 
new act on data  
Description of the 
measure 
Slovakia has the ambition to introduce a modern legal framework for the use 
of data in lien with the general data protection regulation. Entrepreneurs and 
the public sector must learn how to use data they have available efficiently in 
order to provide consumers and citizens with increased added value of 
services. At the same time, we will examine possibilities of applying the Smart 
Disclosure principles that enable consumers take better decisions based on 
access to information and use innovative services and products based on data. 
We will result from precisely defined categorisation and classification of data 
based on their information value and required level of protection. It means that 
there will be a precise definition of rules and processes for reference data, open 
data and the manner how it will be possible to analytically process data 
(including rules for anonymising and  
pseudonymising data).  
At the European level, Slovakia finds it material to handle urgent matters 
concerning ownership, European interoperability, utilisation and access to data 
in various situations such as relations with the public administration, business 
 50 
to business relations, business to consumer relations, machine generated data 
and M2M (machine-to-machine) data. The new European legislation will 
remove barriers to free movement of data in the EU. Citizens will gradually 
acquire the right to control the flow of data they own and grant approval to 
process the data. 
 
In accordance with Act No. 400/2015 Coll., we will prepare the legislation 
intent of the act in the broadest possible extent and, sufficiently in advance of 
submitting it to the government session, we will consult public administration 
authorities that perform supervision over data or process data registers, their 
findings, themes and issues from application practice concerning creation and 
dissemination of data.  
In charge ODPMII  
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2022. The implementation of the measure has already started. 
Source of funding  EU funds 
 
Main expected 
output  
Act on data 
Reference No 
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No  
Projects 
3.1.2 Build-up of a consolidated analytical layer and providing access to important analytical tools 
for the needs of public administration institutions to form public policies based on data  
Description of the 
measure 
We will provide uniform room for the needs of all public administration 
institutions that will make it possible to perform analytical tasks. Many 
analytical units need, for drafting policies or assessing impacts, high quality 
anonymised or pseudonymised data and tools for production and sharing of 
outputs. Ensuring the process of data collection and processing is usually 
complicated. In many cases, data is necessary in various heterogeneous 
information systems in the public administration. The intention of this project 
is to relieve end users form technical aspects of data collection, as much as 
possible, to let them focus on experimenting and analyses. A shared analytical 
layer will ensure fast dissemination and sharing of best practices and 
experience. 
Analytical layer will enable storing, handling and management of data and 
large data bases in various types of databases: Relation databases (SQL), 
NoSQL databases (document-oriented, storages with “key-value”, inspired by 
large tables or graph oriented) as well as New SQL. The solution will enable 
reading data directly from source systems. The analytical layer will provide 
various levels of data storage that can be provided depending on domain 
classification, where domain-specific analyses of data will be carried out. Data 
can be searched thanks to catalogues of metadata and search engines. It is very 
important to fix security and protection of data privacy (thanks to 
anonymisation and pseudonymisation, cryptography and levels of access with 
different granularity).  
Analytical tools will be available to users from the public administration and 
enable making analyses over batch data and data flows for operative analyses. 
In this field, we will support cooperation with research and university teams. 
We expect that the following tools will be available: 
 Traditional BI tools that support analytical functions over classic structured 
data sources (facts), 
 51 
 Machine learning – toolkit supporting data processing using methods of 
artificial intelligence, 
 Statistical tools that enable creation of statistic data models, testing of 
hypotheses, factor analyses, correlations, regressions, etc., 
 Tools for simulations that make it possible to simulate historical and future 
course of modelled events over selected set of historical and current data, 
 Tools for visualising data and publication of results of analytical research. 
Analytical units that have been set up at different ministries help form policies 
on the basis of data. We propose further systemisation of policy making in 
cooperation with the data office of the ODPMII and continuously extend the 
list of policies that will be defined on the basis of data, in particular in priority 
areas such as transport (issues concerning transport safety and intensity), health 
care (optimising the network of health care providers, introducing new 
medications, coordination of health care policies) as well as social affairs, 
labour market, environment protection and financial policies. For each policy, 
there will be data model, its interpretation and reference to data sources. 
In charge ODPMII 
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
30 June 2022. The implementation of the measure has already started. 
Source of funding  EU funds 
Main expected 
output  
Providing data to analytical units in public administration authorities  
Reference No  
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No  
3.1.3 Setting up the system for sharing spatial information  
Description of the 
measure 
Spatial data have a specific position. They are bound to a certain location and 
its correct use can significantly help monitor the effectiveness of selected 
policies, e.g. in environment protection, public health policy, etc. Therefore, it 
is necessary to increase the scope of available spatial data and related services 
that can be searched more easily and work with them. It means a significant 
increase of public administration institutions that work with spatial data 
correctly. The key aspect will be increasing the level of providing access, 
harmonisation and quality of spatial data and services, as well as engagement 
of the private sector, science and research and, last but not least, population. 
Spatial information could be used also in application of augmented reality 
using a broad spectrum of devices (such as phones, tablets or headsets) and 
their innovative solutions.  
  
Currently, building up such system in required in the EU by the INSPIRE 
Directive. Unfortunately, Slovakia is currently lagging behind and, for 
majority of topics, necessary data and services are not available. Therefore, we 
will create a single platform for sharing harmonised spatial data that will ensure 
credible access and support new possibilities of utilisation of related services. 
In charge Ministry of Environment  
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2022. The implementation of the measure has already started. 
Source of funding  EU funds 
Main expected 
output  
Single platform for sharing harmonised spatial data and services  
Reference Directive 2007/2/EC 
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No  
 52 
3.1.4 Testing utilisation of the blockchain technology in public administration on pilot projects  
Description of the 
measure 
 Technical solutions that can occur thanks to the technology of 
decentralized general ledger (blockchain) have the potential to 
restructure institutions as we know them thanks to guaranteeing credible 
transactions among participants. A credible third party is necessary in 
order to ensure credibility of transactions. Besides institutional 
innovation, a decentralised architecture can contribute to building a 
better internet that is more in line with European values than the current 
model. Experimenting in the field of blockchain is therefore important 
for Slovakia, too. Using blockchain makes sense if: 
 The situation includes a large number of independent entities without 
explicit trust, 
 The proposed solution changes functioning of institutions and makes it 
possible to leave out intermediaries (often a public administration 
institution, bank, exchange), 
 A value cycle occurs in the ecosystem that cannot be captured at present. 
 It is necessary to take into consideration that the technology is not ready 
for large production deployment yet, due to high energy demands, slow 
processing or low level of security. Many difficulties can be fixed 
gradually. Some countries, such as South Korea and the Dubai Emirate 
want to build the whole public documents processing on this technology. 
In Slovakia, we propose starting with managed experiments in various 
cases of use. Suitable pilot projects will be designed and implemented in 
the Laboratory for better services and digital innovations with other units 
of ODPMII.  
In charge ODPMII in cooperation with institutions that will deploy innovations 
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2021. The implementation of the measure has not started yet.  
Source of funding  EU funds 
Main expected 
output  
Testing the blockchain technology in the form of pilot projects 
Reference No  
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No  
3.2 Innovations in the public administration  
The first wave of informatization and innovations in the public administration by means of digital 
technologies occurred between 2010 and 2015 as part of the Operational Programme Informatization of 
the Society. Information systems and digital services that resulted from this effort failed to meet 
expectations to large extent because we did not manage to transform corporate processes that became 
obsolete in the meantime and costs were apparently too high. 
Many initiatives presented in the Strategy have been in the process of preparation for several years and 
the process of public procurement has not even started. On the other hand, the first wave of 
informatization led to formation of a layer of official records and information systems that can serve as 
the basis for superstructure services with added value. 
The current situation and slow deployment of innovations is incompatible with technological progress 
and it is necessary to significantly reduce the process of preparation as well as investment costs of future 
projects. One possible solution is experimenting in the public administration and changing the culture 
in order to make innovations actually possible. If we want to modernise the operation of the public 
administration and succeed, primarily, it is necessary to change the way how the public administration 
is able to innovate. 
 
 
 
 53 
Ambition 
We will significantly reduce the time necessary for deployment of innovations into practice. In the 
public administration, testing pilot solutions will become a standard feature. Innovation cycle of 
IT solutions must be reduced under one year by 2021. Experimenting, organising competition and 
engaging companies will become a standard for functioning of public administration institutions. 
Regulation 
3.2.1 Drafting the concept of innovation public-private partnership 
Description of the 
measure 
The concept and methodology of innovation partnership will be developed 
and, based on them, it will be possible to support implementation of innovative 
solutions. Private partners can offer interesting services with higher quality 
and lower costs and often possess knowledge necessary for successful 
innovation. Today’s relation in providing public services is often classic 
supplier-customer relationship that is not suitable for most calls. In order to 
make partnerships work, we need “future-proof” framework that defines open 
conditions for setting up partnerships, forms of cooperation, financial models, 
intellectual property protection, personal data protection, sharing costs and 
revenues among partners and other important issues. The concept of 
partnership will occur in practice especially in newly established labs and it 
will focus on supporting innovations such as artificial intelligence. 
The above concept will be reviewed also from the viewpoint of possible new 
forms of agile governance with regard to ongoing unprecedented dynamic 
changes, growing flow of data, increasing online participation of inhabitants 
and strengthening influence of multinational corporations on management and 
running of the society.17 
In charge ODPMII 
Deadline / duration 
/ measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2020. The implementation of the measure has not started yet. 
Source of funding  No additional expenditure is expected  
Main expected 
output  
Innovation partnership concept and methodology  
Reference No 
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No 
Organisation 
3.2.2 Setting up a laboratory for better services and digital innovations  
Description of the 
measure 
The Action Plan assumes the necessity to support targeted experimenting and 
testing of various innovative models even before their possible deployment in 
the public, private or NGO sector. Therefore, the ODPMII is currently 
working on setting up a new organisational unit – Digital Innovations 
Laboratory – for testing agile approaches to governance and formation of 
public policies. Such government “start-up“ will be in charge of setting and 
managing better and more conceptual digital policy of the state, make more 
effective calculations of possible effects of future legislative and strategic 
measures, increase innovation capacity of the state and strengthen cooperation 
between the public sector, private sector, academia and civil society in the 
process of digitalization. The Laboratory will also come up with innovative 
solutions for administration of data as well as credible public data and private 
data, e.g. in the form of voice activated use interface and personal assistants. 
                                                     
 
17 https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/future-government-2030-citizen-centric-perspective-new-government-models 
 54 
Similar laboratories also operate abroad. There are successful examples of 
identical projects in Europe in Denmark and directly at the Commission – Joint 
research centre of the EU.  
In charge ODPMII 
Deadline / duration 
/ measure 
implementation /  
31. 12. 2019. The implementation of the measure has already started. 
Source of funding  EU funds 
 
Main expected 
output  
Setting up a laboratory for better services and digital innovations  
Reference No 
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No 
3.2.3 Implementation of activities of the behavioural innovations laboratory (BRISK) 
Description of the 
measure 
Behavioural Research and Innovations Slovakia (BRISK) or the digital nudge 
unit, is a new innovative and dynamic unit at the ODPMII, which brings latest 
knowledge of behavioural sciences to Slovakia. That unit started its full 
operation in February 2019. It brings behavioural interventions into the 
environment of electronic services of the public administration, supervises 
communication of government services from the viewpoint of citizens and 
entrepreneurs, tries to understand them, their feelings and decisions in order 
to make digital government services user friendly, make citizens know about 
services and use them. Inter alia, it also includes administration of tools to 
achieve uniform user perception of services of the state (as a uniform design 
of electronic services) to make the visualisation of services user friendly, make 
handbooks and transfer of domestic and foreign experts. 
In charge ODPMII 
Deadline / duration 
/ measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2022. The implementation of the measure has already started. 
Source of funding  EU funds 
 
Main expected 
output  
Performance of activities of the organisational unit  
Reference OP EPA project - Improvement of digital services in public administration by 
means of behavioural innovations. 
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No 
3.2.4 Setting up of methodological and evaluation unit and expert platform to support 
development of smart cities and regions  
Description of the 
measure 
At present, the local government is facing significant changes connected to the 
effort to ensure sustainable growth. Smart technologies provide the local 
government with huge opportunities for its development and offer solutions of 
environmental, economic and social changes. Smart cities can become the 
driving force of a new European policy that will be able to influence 
development of specific manufacturing sectors and expand benefits of the 
digital economy. The ODPMII finds it necessary to help the local government 
and create conditions for effective deployment and use of smart solutions, in 
the form of expert platform for supporting development of mart cities and 
regions. The principal objective of the measure is to create methodological and 
evaluation unit for smart cities and regions and create an expert platform to 
support development of smart cities and regions. An inspiration for this 
platform is the URBIS platform set up by the European Commission (DG 
REGIO) and the EIB. 
 55 
Methodological and evaluation unit, after being set up, will focus on 
the following activities: 
 Preparation of the National strategy for development of smart regions 
(including a benchmark for smart cities and regions in Slovakia), 
 Preparation of recommended methodology and procedures for making 
strategies and concepts of smart regions, 
 Analysis and assessment of impacts of deploying smart region projects.  
The Expert platform will provide the local government with support in 
preparation and implementation of projects and acquiring investments into 
smart development.   
Its goal is not to substitute activities of the local government but to complement 
activities of cities and regions and provide expert support in specific fields. 
The Expert platform and the Methodological and evaluation unit will provide 
support to those municipalities that do not qualify for the support from 
European initiatives. 
In charge ODPMII 
Deadline / duration / 
measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2020. The implementation of the measure has not started yet. 
Source of funding  EU funds 
Main expected 
output  
Setting up of methodological and evaluation unit and expert platform  
Reference No 
Dependence on other 
AP measures 
No 
3.2.5 Setting up an office for digital innovations in local government  
Description of the 
measure 
Large number of public administration agenda is carried out at the level of 
local government, which has its specific features. It applies to larger as well as 
smaller towns and villages with different needs and priorities as well as self-
governing regions facing different challenges. A central tool for innovations 
in the 21st century is, above all, digital technologies, thanks to which towns, 
villages and regions can improve lives of their inhabitants, improve providing 
public services and increasing the effectiveness of decision making and 
performance of the self-government. Globally, this approach is referred to as 
smart city, but it also applies to smart regions, smart towns and smart villages 
or communities. In Slovakia, this approach has been gaining ground relatively 
slowly, because Slovakia is even now still fighting a certain digital abyss 
between the level of informatization and the utilisation of technologies in 
small and big municipalities. There have also been cases when expectations of 
citizens and entrepreneurs regarding the quality, speed and access to services 
were not sufficiently reflected, even in bigger cities.  We have few pilot 
solutions, experiments with better performance of the local government 
powers and utilisation of possibilities that are provided by digital technologies. 
There are several state documents being prepared in order to support such 
approach at the level of the local government. Due to the above, it makes sense 
to set up a unit that will handle specific issues of the local government 
concerning smart solutions and digital innovations and deployment of new 
digital technologies. The unit will focus on identification of needs of the 
population and local government authorities for the purposes of proper 
functioning in the digital era, participation in drafting relevant policies, testing 
pilot smart solutions, innovative public services and digital innovations in 
different local government authorities and evaluation of the most effective 
means of their implementation also from the viewpoint of the “value for 
 56 
money” principle and their scalability and their possible application in other 
local government authorities. The Office for digital innovations in the local 
government should evaluate conditions for significant innovations of public 
policies, services and the functioning of the local government as such. Its role 
will be to support synergies, sharing best experience and practice. We can see 
big potential in better us of data and, therefore, the proposed tools should 
include support to the use of analytical solutions. 
For the purpose of the setup, we recommend using the ESIF funds (OP EPA 
2014-2020) alternatively, 2021-2027 ESIF funds. 
In charge DEUS in cooperation with associations of municipalities and regions  
Deadline / duration / 
measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2022. The implementation of the measure has not started yet.  
Main expected 
output  
Setting up an office for digital innovations in local government.  
Source of funding state budget / EU funds 
Reference No 
Dependence on other 
AP measures 
No 
Projects 
3.2.6 Setting up the platform for finding innovative solutions  
Description of the 
measure 
The public administration is facing many difficulties that require creative and 
bold solutions. In developed countries, it has become a common practice to 
turn the process of problem solution into a contest for best ides where the 
best ones will be rewarded. An example for it is the US platform 
challenge.gov.  
The purpose of this activity will be to create a similar platform for engaging 
students, scientific teams, NGOs, businesses – simply anyone, who has the 
capacity to get involved and who can come with solutions. The challenge 
will be to get sufficiently big audience interested in it. The platform can be 
connected to other initiatives, such as organising hackathons that are gaining 
popularity in the private and public sector. Digital innovations laboratory 
notifies calls in the form of public contest and the public can submit their 
solution proposals. 
In charge ODPMII 
Deadline / duration / 
measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2022. The implementation of the measure has not started yet. 
Source of funding  EU funds 
 
Main expected 
output  
Platform to bring creative solutions of problems in the public administration  
Reference No 
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
3.2.3 
3.2.7 Providing new opportunities for doing business and innovations of public services by means 
of open API 
Description of the 
measure 
The purpose of the open API platform is to provide the expert public with 
technical interface to let them further develop technical means using 
electronic services of the government. Such approach to electronic services 
will lead to diversity of services for citizens, which will further increase the 
demand of citizens for government services and their satisfaction. Examples 
of such creative development of services using open data are Finnish “tax 
tree „and British “where does my money go”, which show, in a user-friendly 
 57 
manner, how and where the government uses collected taxes. It means that 
open data makes it possible to implement a whole range of other services 
while it is a non-controlled process of free market – open data and the 
respective platform, which provides access to data, are inevitable 
prerequisites of it. The purpose of the activity is to develop a detailed 
methodology – manual explaining how to proceed while using the platform. 
The platform will make it possible to open application interfaces of public 
administration information systems in order to make it possible for 
application services to also use trustworthy information systems of third 
parties. That will build creative competition between commercial solutions 
that will lead to development of innovative solutions without participation of 
the government and thus without further costs for the state budget but also 
with direct positive impact for citizens and businesses. 
An example of such solution is developing applications to simplify the 
paperwork for entrepreneurs as they will have the possibility to use provided 
APIs to simplify processes of communication with the government, e.g. 
software for accounting will not have to access to the Financial 
administration portal in order to submit the tax return statement. Those 
activities will be done by the application itself that will use published 
services of the government, in that case, the financial administration at the 
API platform. Concerning API solutions for digital services, emphasis will 
be placed on compliance with GDPR (personal data protection) and use of 
tools for personal data management (My data service). 
The National Agency for Network and Electronic Service (NASES) is 
building pilot project API GW based on the module of official 
communication of the public administration. On the top of that basis, the 
ODPMII will build full-fledged API GW from the finds of the Operational 
Programme Integrated Infrastructure, which deals with the access to digital 
services for registration and modification of data in state registers. The 
portfolio of third-party applications is thus much broader and innovative 
applications can substitute the whole interaction between users and the 
government. 
In charge ODPMII  
Deadline / duration / 
measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2022. The implementation of the measure has not started yet. 
Source of funding  EU funds 
Main expected 
output  
Open API GW, new API accesses 
Reference No 
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
3.2.3 
  
 58 
4. We will support development of artificial intelligence  
Priority We will support development of artificial intelligence consists of two themes: 
4.1  Research and education in the field of artificial intelligence, 
4.2  Increase of the economic growth in Slovakia with the use of artificial intelligence. 
In December 2018, the Coordinated plan on artificial intelligence was adopted at the European level and 
it obliges Member States to principal obligations in developing their national capacities and international 
cooperation in the field of artificial intelligence. Inter alia, the adopted document implies that Member 
States are to adopt their own national strategies concerning the use of artificial intelligence. In order to 
meet the above obligation, the Government of the Slovak Republic adopted the Strategy and, at the same 
time, by means of this Action Plan, it has proposed a group of particular measures aimed at supporting 
research, education, testing and deployment of systems based on the use of artificial intelligence. 
Implementation of the above measures will be reviewed on continuous basis in regular intervals, with 
the presence of all affected parties due to dynamics of the research, development and deployment of this 
technology. 
Use of artificial intelligence must be based on demonstrably secure deployment of this technology and 
respecting international principles and recommendations, such as Principles of OECD for artificial 
intelligence18, approved in May 2019 or recommendations of the European Commission for trustworthy 
artificial intelligence19. That will require meeting the following requirements: 1. Increase, adequately 
depending on the pace of development of artificial intelligence applications, sufficient understanding of 
artificial intelligence by the general public, 2. Recognise and correctly address social risks resulting 
from artificial intelligence, 3. Adjust education and vocational training to the digital era, 4. Regulate and 
improve data processing, 5. Adjust protection of rights and freedoms to the needs of the digital era. 
Global demand for experts in the field of artificial intelligence in the global market economy with both, 
academic or commercial focus, is highly above the global supply and its consequence is that experts 
associate in organisations where they are rewarded and socially recognised and the country or continent 
where the organisation is located is less relevant. 
With the strategic setting of education and research in Slovakia with specialisation in artificial 
intelligence, it is important to not only focus efforts to set up a system that will effectively produce such 
experts as well as develop environment for full utilisation of their ambitions and overall satisfaction. 
This effort to educate and keep experts in artificial intelligence in our territory should help us in building 
the technological autonomy. 
The whole list of recommendations on artificial intelligence will be successful if we simultaneously 
increase awareness of artificial intelligence among the general public whose lives will be affected by it. 
It is necessary to identify, at the national level, opportunities for artificial intelligence in Slovakia (in 
what way we will be developing, what sectors will be priority for us, what we are good at).on the part 
of the government and for the needs of the state, it is necessary to support pilot projects in the private 
sector by supporting projects of application experimenting with artificial intelligence in the public sector 
and increasing accessibility of public services using artificial intelligence. 
4.1 research and education in the field of artificial intelligence 
Ambition 
Provide access to basic principles and mechanism of functioning of artificial intelligence to the 
general public by means of public education. Positive promotion of subjects that form the basis of 
artificial intelligence among pupils and primary and secondary schools. Establish shared 
education of experts of selected aspects of artificial intelligence at universities. Take part in 
building globally competitive conditions that will actually make it possible for domestic and 
selected foreign experts in artificial intelligence to operate in our country. Support setting up 
expert groups for moving the research and application of artificial intelligence forward as well as 
                                                     
 
18http://www.oecd.org/going-
digital/ai/principles/?utm_source=Adestra&utm_medium=email&utm_content=ai&utm_campaign=Going%20Digital%20AI%20principles&
utm_term=demo 
19 https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/ethics-guidelines-trustworthy-ai 
 59 
coordination of educational activities in this field. An important part will rest in cooperation with 
research institutions, their involvement in particular projects and providing access to data 
necessary for the research.  
Organisation 
4.1.1 Involvement of the Slovak Republic in the EU initiative for building European centres of 
excellence for artificial intelligence   
Description of the 
measure 
For Slovakia it is necessary to get involved in European initiatives in the field 
of artificial intelligence, where it can increase its research capacity and 
attractiveness of the research in the field of artificial intelligence. Unless we 
take measures aimed at building centres of excellence, the existing small 
capacity in the research will continue diminishing. Due to small research 
capacity in the field of artificial intelligence as well as in the academic sector, 
there is not a big chance that the private sector in Slovakia could make Slovakia 
apply for such centre separately. However, in connection with V4 countries, a 
unique grouping can occur that will make it possible to acquire one of the 
planned centres of excellence for artificial intelligence in our region.  
In 2020, the European Commission intends to provide 50 million euros to a 
network of European centres of excellence by means of Horizon 2020 
programme and Slovakia intends to get involved in the network.  
By engaging Slovakia in European structures of excellence, the research 
positions will become more attractive, we will be in the centre of events and 
our chances of acquiring additional sources and involvement in European 
activities will increase.  
It is important for such centre to serve for the benefit of all involved parties 
and to ensure distributed nature of experts who will not have to be concentrated 
in one field. 
In charge ODPMII will support affected entities in order to get Slovakia involved in 
European structures of responsibility  
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
30 June 2020, continuously. The implementation of the measure has not started 
yet. 
Source of funding  State budget / EU funds 
Main expected 
output  
Involvement of Slovakia in European excellence structures  
Reference Coordinated plan of the EU for artificial intelligence  
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No 
4.1.2 Setting up an expert group for coordination of educational activities in artificial intelligence  
Description of the 
measure 
Without educating experts at various levels of knowledge and skills, it will not 
be possible to ensure competitiveness of the labour force in Slovakia. The goal 
is to build a coordinating group that will act as a part of the national platform 
for artificial intelligence, for example, and that will: 
 Map and analyse relevant educational programmes (regarding the content, 
form, success rate) abroad and in Slovakia, 
 Monitor global trends in the field of research and application but also safe 
and suitable use of artificial intelligence, 
 Prepare recommendations for education in the field of artificial intelligence 
in Slovakia for various target groups, 
 Provide consultancy services concerning education on artificial 
intelligence for schools, public sector entities as well as the business sector. 
The role of the expert group can be delegated alternatively to the platform for 
research and use of artificial intelligence. 
In charge Ministry of Education in cooperation with the ODPMII and other stakeholders  
 60 
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
30 June 2020. The implementation of the measure has not started yet. 
Source of funding  No additional expenditure is expected  
 
Main expected 
output  
Setup of the expert group  
Reference No 
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No 
Projects 
4.1.3 Development of a tool for natural language processing  
Description of the 
measure 
By means of targeted efforts, it will be necessary to prepare and finance 
projects on the part of the demand as well as of the supply and support diffusion 
of tools for natural language processing (NLP) in practice. It will be necessary 
to remove barriers in the use and development of text and voice corpus of the 
Slovak language with specific regard to safe and practical application of such 
technologies in the field of public services. It will be possible to use the 
methods of natural language processing for monitoring of priority holistic goal, 
i.e. increasing transparency of the Slovak regulatory framework. Subsequently, 
it will be possible to use features of semantic text and voice analysis for 
automation and electronization of subset of services in the contact with 
authorities, medical facilities and schools, which will make opportunities for 
developing innovative packages of services and products also for commercial 
sector, e.g. in IT sector, in the field of data transfer security, in automobile 
industry as well as in other fields of the commercial sector. 
Mechanism: Setting up a centralised and coordinated approach to tools for 
natural language processing for Slovak will accelerate the development of 
corpuses and support their use. It is necessary to provide access to corpuses 
under preparation, research results, methods and algorithms. Effective 
cooperation of research teams in academic and commercial sector will support 
development of tools for Slovak that can be used in various applications. 
Such mechanism, applied to increasing transparency of priority regulatory 
environment using tools for natural language processing can be later used in 
other EU countries as well as by the EU itself. 
In charge ODPMII  
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2020 and continuously. The implementation of the measure has 
not started yet. 
Source of funding  EU funds 
Main expected 
output  
Development of the centralised mechanism and approach to tools for natural 
language processing  
Reference No 
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No 
4.1.4 Defining themes with the social need and preparation of pilot projects with a broad support 
of experts in artificial intelligence  
Description of the 
measure 
We will identify and define themes with social impact whose solutions requires 
methods and models of artificial intelligence. Based on such themes, we will 
prepare and notify pilot projects based on the open-source principle. 
 Particular projects will be defined either directly (e.g. analysis of tax data 
and uncovering tax evasions, detection of disinformation in media (in 
Slovak language), effective communication of machines and people in 
services in Slovak language , selected medical issue, prediction of security 
 61 
threats, use of artificial intelligence for safer Internet for children up to the 
use of digital technologies using artificial intelligence in order to slow 
down or avert climate changes or introduction of circular and low-carbon 
economy) or indirectly by means of hackathons.  
 We will select companies and universities, whose tole will be to engage a 
broader community of experts.  
 We will assist in implementation of projects. 
In order to increase the quality of research in artificial intelligence as well as 
to accelerate deployment of artificial intelligence, it is necessary to put together 
sufficient number of experts, high quality data and computation capacity. One 
suitable method is making model solutions of pilot projects that will enable 
defining suitable processes for making high quality data, ensure computation 
infrastructure and attract experts from academic, public and private sector 
thanks to their nature. That will only be possible if: 
 The selected theme reflects the social need, 
 Initial results of the project are delivered within one year, 
 The project will last adequately long time period (ideally 5 years). 
In charge ODPMII in cooperation with relevant ministries, with the presence of 
universities, Slovak Academy of Sciences and the business sector  
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2020, continuously. The implementation of the measure has not 
started yet. 
Source of funding   EU funds 
Main expected 
output  
Identifying themes 
Reference No 
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No 
4.1.5 Defining and notification of calls for grant schemes for basic and applied research focused 
on artificial intelligence  
Description of the 
measure 
Define and notify calls for grant schemes for basic and applied research 
focused on artificial intelligence with the focus on: 
 Basic research, 
 Applied research in connection to academic and private sectors, 
 Multidisciplinary research in artificial intelligence,  
 Research in the field of safe use of artificial intelligence and techniques for 
securing artificial intelligence-based applications.  
We will define and notify calls in order to make them consistent with activities 
of the Commission, complement them in a suitable manner and support the 
quality resulting from the quality of existing research HR infrastructure, which 
has to be extended as well as in academic and private sector. A direct financial 
support to the research will make it possible to enhance capacities of 
stakeholders and contribute to increasing the competitiveness of Slovakia in 
artificial intelligence. 
Recommended activity: prepare and notify calls by means of existing entities 
and schemes (Slovak Research and Development Agency, state programmes, 
ESIF). 
 
Specific emphasis will be put on supporting research and development of 
trustworthy artificial intelligence in the sense of recommendations of the 
European Commission as well as of the OECD. 
In charge ODPMII in cooperation with the ODPMII, universities and the business sector   
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2021, continuously. The implementation of the measure has not 
started yet. 
 62 
Source of funding  EU funds (public private partnership) 
Main expected 
output  
Notified grant calls  
Reference No 
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No 
4.1.6 Introduction of joint education of experts about selected aspects of artificial intelligence 
Description of the 
measure 
The purpose of the measure is to increase the number of students in study 
majors that are connected to artificial intelligence. Its goal is to:  
 Set up a platform for shared education of selected AI aspects in English 
language in the form of “blended learning”, 
 Get foreign students for the study of graduate study majors or different 
courses, 
 Set up a database of research activities and projects in the field of artificial 
intelligence in Slovakia,  
 Notifying grant calls for drafting and developing joint education in English 
language,  
 Improvement of end-point communication and information infrastructure 
for the needs of mixed education,  
 Preparation of courses in English language and their remote teaching for 
foreign students. It will be financed from existing budgets of universities 
and Slovak grant schemes. 
We expect that developing high quality study majors will reduce the churn of 
potential university students abroad. The system of shred teaching can serve as 
the basis of joint study majors and sharing of courses can help expand existing 
study majors with artificial intelligence. Providing individual courses on-line 
in English language will contribute to popularising Slovak education abroad. 
A measurable criterion of success of the recommendation is an increase of 
graduates of study majors that refer to artificial intelligence in their graduate 
profiles. 
In charge Ministry of Education in cooperation with the ODPMII and universities 
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2020, continuously. The implementation of the measure has not 
started yet. 
Source of funding  State budget / EU funds (public private partnership) 
Main expected 
output  
Increase of the number of students of study majors related to artificial 
intelligence  
Reference No 
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No 
4.2 Increase of the economic growth of Slovakia using artificial intelligence  
Unprecedented increase of human productivity efficiency by deploying technologies with features of 
artificial intelligence is already transforming global economy and society. Therefore, the Slovak 
Republic must also respond quickly and effectively as it is one of the developed countries most 
threatened by substitution of jobs by artificial intelligence in the next decade due to its structure of 
industry. However, we can see huge potential in the use of artificial intelligence that can result in 
increasing competitiveness of Slovak economy. Based on estimates of consultancy company PwC, it is 
possible to assume that artificial intelligence will generate more than USD 16 trillion by 2030 and 
increase global GDP by 26 per cent. Therefore, we find it important to support investments of the 
business sector in this field. 
We also find it important to support technological sector in Slovakia and companies dealing with the 
development and applications based on AI. Development and application of such solutions is 
accompanied with high added value. In order to strengthen this sector of economy, it is in our interest 
to be one of countries that will have strong representation in this field. 
 63 
Ambition 
Slovakia will make use of the human potential of experts prepared by academic facilities in the 
field of artificial intelligence in order to support development of the sector with high added value 
that will attract further investments. Launching the demand for technologies with features of 
artificial intelligence will enhance not only competitiveness of the economy in sectors where such 
technologies will be deployed but also development of IT sector in this field with high added value 
with the potential to expand to global markets. 
Regulation 
4.2.1 Analysis of the regulatory environment for artificial intelligence  
Description of the 
measure 
The intention is to set up an advisory group at the Digital Agenda Section of 
the ODPMII composed of experts from private, academic and public 
administration sectors that will make recommendations concerning the need 
for amending existing regulatory environment. The role of the advisory group 
can also be delegated to the platform for research and utilisation of artificial 
intelligence. 
Its activities should focus, primarily, on legislative and technical obstacles of 
effective use of AI tools, availability of data sets in a suitable form, quality and 
structure, “dual” education (basic knowledge concerning functioning of AI 
algorithms and professional knowledge in fields where AI utilisation is 
expected), transparency and comprehensiveness of data sets, access to data – 
mainly from public institutions, support to research and development, making 
opportunities for entrepreneurs and, subsequently, framework assessment of 
impacts of proposed measures. 
From the viewpoint of regulation, the relevant activity will not only cover the 
data collection but also the ways of data use and purposes for which data is 
used. The analysis should also review suitability of the framework for 
intellectual property in the field of AI, model for open data management that 
will result from the current regulatory status in the Slovak Republic and the 
EU and also reflect requirements of cyber security. 
High quality analysis is the basic precondition for setting an effective 
regulatory environment. Moreover, knowledge of opinions of the general 
public is important for a correct model of AI management.  
Effective regulatory environment combining legislative and non-legislative 
instruments (e.g. codes of conduct, standards, industry best practices, 
reporting) is of key importance for competitiveness of the Slovak Republic not 
only in the field of AI, reducing the lag, increase of foreign direct investments, 
identification of strategies for the use of AI as a tools of transformation and 
long-term increase of competitiveness of Slovak companies also in the field of 
research and development. Ineffective regulatory environment is also slowing 
down AI activities. 
In charge ODPMII 
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2019. The implementation of the measure has not started yet. 
Source of funding  No additional expenditure is expected  
Main expected 
output  
Analysis of the regulatory environment  
Reference No 
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No 
 64 
4.2.2 Designing and supporting implementation of principles of transparent and ethical use of AI 
Description of the 
measure 
Digital transformation must be carried out under supervision on the state sector 
in order to make sure that artificial intelligence as well as other benefits of the 
digital are used for the purposes of supporting our social values and legal 
principles. Specifically, the government must focus, in the process of correct 
setting of the use of smart systems, mainly on the following steps:  
 Modify and enhance legislation for protection of rights and freedoms of 
individuals as well as on collective rights in the use of smart AI-based 
systems, 
 Regularly enhance legislation for the purposes of better data protection and 
its regulation at the national and international level, 
 Regulate legal liability as well as related insurance frameworks for 
technological and innovative companies for their innovations so that, in the 
event of possible errors and risks, they worked on their removal in order to 
ensure trustworthy use of AI and its responsible deployment, 
 Set the legislation that will not inadequately threaten development of AI,  
 Enhance communication and cooperation between state authorities and 
technological companies in order to better address social and other risks of 
digital transformation for citizens, 
 Support implementation of measures about the use of AI that will be 
adopted at the European level by means of High-Level Expert Group on 
Artificial Intelligence (AI HLEG).  
Promotion of best ethical procedures: Implementation of a survey among 
companies with experience in implementing artificial intelligence and among 
expert public about benefits of the technology and their concerns. Setting up 
of a mechanism for continuous collection of best ethical procedures from 
companies and the public with the focus on practical and theoretical experience 
(catalogue of case studies). Foster involvement of Slovak companies in the 
pilot project Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI Assessment. 
In charge ODPMII in cooperation with the Ministry of Economy  
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2020, continuously. The implementation of the measure has not 
started yet. 
Source of funding  No additional expenditure is expected  
Main expected 
output  
Definition and implementation of ethical principles  
Reference Coordinated plan of the EU for artificial intelligence  
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No 
Organisation 
4.2.3 Supporting the development of artificial intelligence ecosystem   
Description of the 
measure 
We will carry out a public survey in an innovative format by means of chatbots 
about the public perception of AI, with a clear assessment of the starting point 
(ground zero – either as positive or negative). The survey will summarise 
biggest concerns and expectations of the public. The purpose of the survey will 
be to set policies aimed at supporting trustworthiness of artificial intelligence. 
Other tasks will be:  
 Setting clear and comprehensive ethical principles for trustworthy AI and 
their presentation to the public,  
 Harmonisation of the discussion on AI ethics and regulations in Slovakia 
with the status of the discussion in the Eu and elsewhere in the world, in 
particular with Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI, as well as based on 
other existing international documents and standards, 
 65 
 Setting principles of responsibility for AI, above all, for operation of 
autonomous and collaborative systems and for the stage of experimental 
and real operation, with the emphasis on self-learning systems, 
 Engage companies implementing AI and the expert public in activities 
running in the EU, 
 On particular examples, illustrate approaches that are successfully 
developing ethical design of AI in the context of sustainability and have 
actual successful results,  
 Support ethical use, deployment and development of AI in Slovakia,  
 Receive feedback from companies with experience in AI and the expert 
public, 
 Apply the SAM method (scientific advisory mechanism) in making 
concepts, policies and regulations on ethical use of artificial intelligence,  
 Identify possible applications of AI that are in contradiction with these 
principles and deployment of the remedy mechanism. 
 
The task can be delegated to the platform for research and utilisation of 
artificial intelligence. 
In charge ODPMII 
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2020. The implementation of the measure has not started yet. 
Source of funding  No additional expenditure is expected  
 
Main expected 
output  
Opinion survey  
Reference No 
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No 
4.2.4 Setting up the permanent committee for ethics and regulation of artificial intelligence 
Description of the 
measure 
We will set up an authority for cumulation of best practices in developing, 
deploying and use of artificial intelligence and determining the discussion on 
ethical aspects of artificial intelligence. 
We will set up an independent committee that will be able to assess ethical 
aspects of running AI projects and possibly comment on provided services. 
AI regulation and ethics has a broader scope than the policy for data providing. 
Themes that should be paid attention are, not limited to: 
 Ethical principles (supported by legislation) in the use of AI: 
o Fair access to technologies for all groups of population (justice, non-
discrimination),  
o Transparency and controllability of system using AI, comprehensibility 
of basic principles of functioning for the general public (application of 
the informed consent principle),  
o Principle of not causing harm – to assets, health, social status, etc.,  
o Liability for the future – today’s decisions have impact on the future 
development of humankind.  
 The question is if there are decisions that AI must not take and if yes, 
which ones they are (e.g. kill a human, lie, take decision about medical 
intervention, etc.),  
 Building trustworthy AI – not only data but also methods must be 
trustworthy. It is necessary to make sure that selected methods are 
reliable, they are primarily not intended for activities aimed at damaging 
humans, their rights and freedoms,  
 66 
 Positive perception of the public and trust of the public in AI. Better 
understanding of real risks as well as positive aspects brought about by 
the deployment and use of AI.  
It is necessary to conform that we want to develop AI in a way that will not 
only improve the quality of life but that will also support desirable social and 
human values. 
Furthermore, it will be necessary to set up a committee that will have the 
authority to comment actions of entities in development, deployment and use 
of AI tools.  
A similar committee has been working for long in biomedical research. The 
committee operates at the Ministry of Health of the Slovak Republic20. The 
committee should be composed of not only experts in AI  
and regulations but also by experts in ethics or other experts with education in 
humanities (sociology, psychology) and economics.  
In charge ODPMII in cooperation with the Ministry of Economy  
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
31 March 2020. The implementation of the measure has not started yet. 
Source of funding  No additional expenditure is expected  
 
Main expected 
output  
Setup of a permanent committee  
Reference No 
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No 
Projects 
4.2.5 Preparation of a manual for companies for deployment of artificial intelligence 
Description of the 
measure 
We will prepare a universal map and a control list of tasks for companies that 
want to modernise their business using artificial intelligence but that do not 
know how to do it. We will prepare answers to frequently asked questions, 
such as how can artificial intelligence help different types of companies. An 
easy to read manual will contain answers for FAQs, provide preconditions for 
a successful deployment of the technology, define necessary stages of 
implementation of modern technologies and warn of dangers. That will 
simplify access of companies and institutions to the latest and most progressive 
forms of available innovations. It will help companies correctly understand the 
whole modernisation process. 
In charge ODPMII in cooperation with the Ministry of Economy  
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
31 December 2020. The implementation of the measure has not started yet. 
Source of funding  State budget (public private partnership) 
Main expected 
output  
Manual 
Reference No 
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No 
                                                     
 
20 http://www.health.gov.sk/Clanok?statut-etickej-komisie-mzsr  
 67 
4.2.6 Supporting an increase of investments of foreign and Slovak companies into research 
activities  
Description of the 
measure 
It is necessary to improve conditions for setting up research centres of Slovak 
and foreign companies in Slovakia. That will support building industry with 
higher added value. Implementation mechanisms will be: 
 
 Research of the biggest obstacles for corporate investments into research 
activities in Slovakia, 
 Building strong start-up ecosystem, 
 Enhancement of mechanisms for protection of intellectual property and law 
enforcement, 
 Accessibility of public data for experimenting. 
Many companies support education of their employees, however, there is 
shortage of trainings in the field of machine learning and artificial intelligence. 
We propose that the centre of excellence actively search for global experts and 
hold practical trainings with them. We propose reimbursement of participation 
for students, university and secondary school teachers and provide access to 
such workshops also to employees in private and public sector. 
In charge ODPMII in cooperation with the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of 
Economy  
Deadline / 
duration / measure 
implementation /  
30 June 2020. The implementation of the measure has not started yet. 
Source of funding  State budget (public private partnership) 
Main expected 
output  
Increased investments into research activities in the field of AI 
Reference No 
Dependence on 
other AP measures 
No 
 
 
  
 68 
Overview of proposed measures  
Institutional background in order to increase innovative performance of Slovakia, including 
enhancing abilities to use new digital EU funds 
Measure 
designation  
Name of the measure Entities in charge  Deadline  
A Ensuring direct political support to priority 
areas of the Action Plan  
Relevant 
ministries 
31 December 
2019, 
continuously  
B Support to activities of the Digital Coalition ODPMII, MF SR, 
Ministry of 
Education, 
Ministry of 
Labour, ITAS and 
members of the 
Digital Coalition 
30 September 
2019, 
continuously 
C Initiating, support to setting up and connecting 
DIHs in Slovakia (DIH / CDI) 
ODPMII, Ministry 
of Economy, 
ITAS 
31 December 
2020, 
continuously 
D Support to setting up and activities of a 
platform for research and utilisation of 
artificial intelligence  
ODPMII and other 
relevant ministries  
31 December 
2019, 
continuously 
E Support to setting up and activities of the 
platform for research and utilisation of the 
blockchain technology  
ODPMII and other 
relevant ministries  
30 June 2020, 
continuously 
F Support to setting up and activities of national 
high-performance computing competence 
centre  
ODPMII, Slovak 
Academy of 
Sciences and other 
stakeholders  
31 December 
2019, 
continuously  
G Support to setting up and activities of the 
national competence and coordination centre 
for cyber security   
National Security 
Authority, 
ODPMII 
31 December 
2020, 
continuously  
 
1. We will support digital transformation of schools and education in order to improve the quality 
and preconditions for employments and acquisition of digital skills and competences necessary 
for the digital era   
Measure 
designation  
Name of the measure Entities in charge  Deadline  
1.1.1 Preparation of the programme for 
informatization of education until 2030 
Ministry of 
Education  
31 December 
2019  
 
1.1.2 Systemic change of the system of education 
preparing employees for the needs of economy  
Ministry of 
Education, 
Ministry of 
Labour  
31 December 
2020  
 
1.1.3 Life-long education – comprehensive systemic 
change, strategy and implementation of 
legislative measures  
Ministry of 
Education, 
Ministry of 
Labour  
31 December 
2019 
 69 
1.1.4 Setting up a working group in order to build a 
coordinated mechanism to counter 
disinformation  
Chairman of the 
Security Council 
of the Slovak 
Republic  
31 December 
2019  
1.1.5 Preparation of an analysis of the condition of 
digital skills in Slovakia with a proposal of 
particular measures  
ODPMII, Ministry 
of Education, 
Office of the 
Government, 
Ministry of 
Labour  
31 December 
2020 
1.1.6 Support to activities aimed at increasing the 
share of women in IT and digital sector  
Ministry of 
Education, 
ODPMII, Ministry 
of Labour and 
partners active in 
this field  
30 June 2020, 
continuously  
1.1.7 Preparation of a study of the digital 
transformation and recommendations at the 
national level in the field of employment, 
qualifications and labour forms – Work 4.0 
Ministry of 
Labour, Ministry 
of Education  
31 December 
2019 
1.1.8 Support to increasing competences of young 
people for the digital era in the formal 
education  
Ministry of 
Education  
31 December 
2019, 
continuously  
1.1.9 Initiating activities leading to assessment of 
impacts of the use of smart system and digital 
technologies on development, health and 
behaviour of people  
Ministry of 
Health, ODPMII 
31 December 
2019, 
continuously  
1.2.1 Making employment of IT specialists in state 
and public administration more attractive  
Office of the 
Government, MF 
SR 
31 December 
2021 
1.2.2 Support to acquiring talents for study and 
employment of experts from abroad, including 
universities and industry  
Ministry of 
Labour, Ministry 
of Education, 
Ministry of 
Interior, Ministry 
of Economy, 
Office of the 
Government, 
ODPMII 
30 June 2020 
 
2. We will set up the basis for modern digital and data economy and for the digital transformation 
of economy in general  
Measure 
designation  
Name of the measure Entities in charge  Deadline  
2.1.1  Increasing effectiveness of the regulation of 
electronic communications market for the 
benefit of growing coverage of the territory 
with ultra-fast connection  
Ministry of 
Transport 
31 December 
2020, every 
year 
2.1.2  Support to completion of the build-up of 
gigabit fibre connection accessible in the sense 
of the EU strategy for European Gigabit 
Society  
ODPMII, Ministry 
of Transport 
31 December 
2020, every 
year 
 70 
2.1.3  Support to measures from the 5G for Europe 
Action Plan and 5G Roadmap from z Tallinn 
to have one big city covered with 5G until 
2020  
ODPMII, Ministry 
of Transport, 
Regulatory 
Authority for 
Electronic 
Communications 
and Postal 
Services, National 
Security Authority 
31 December 
2020, every 
year  
2.1.4 Setting up the institute for providing access to 
trustworthy data 
ODPMII 31 December 
2020 
2.1.5 Deployment of a pilot solution for personal 
data administration  
ODPMII 31 December 
2021 
2.2.1 Introduction of systemic evaluation of effects 
of regulations on innovations and digital 
economy 
Ministry of 
Economy, 
ODPMII 
31 December 
2021 
2.2.2 Introduction of the system of goal oriented 
dynamic regulation  
Ministry of 
Economy, 
ODPMII 
31 January 
2021 
2.2.3 Support to new business models in the digital 
economy, identifying of segments for the 
platform economy and extension of the 
portfolio of activities of the Slovak Investment 
Holding   
ODPMII, MF SR, 
Ministry of 
Economy 
31 December 
2021 
2.3.1 Adoption of the national Strategy for Smart 
Mobility  
Ministry of 
Transport 
30 June 2020  
2.3.2 Preparing draft concept of innovation public-
private partnership for smart mobility solutions  
ODPMII 30 June 2020  
2.3.3 Preparing draft Action plan for deployment of 
smart mobility in the Slovak Republic  
Ministry of 
Transport 
31 December 
2020 
2.3.4 Preparation of the legislation for testing and 
operation of self-driving vehicles  
Ministry of 
Transport 
31 December 
2021 
2.3.5 Preparing environment for experimental 
verification of the regulation for smart mobility  
Ministry of 
Transport 
31 December 
2021 
2.3.6 Performance of activities of the platform for 
smart mobility as the “Smart mobility lab” 
Ministry of 
Transport, 
ODPMII 
30 June 2021 
2.3.7 Reviewing possibilities of institutional support 
to self-driving cars testing  
Ministry of 
Transport 
30 June 2021  
2.3.8 Introduction of selected innovation pilot 
concepts in transport, so called Proof of 
Concept  
Ministry of 
Transport 
31 December 
2021 
2.4.1 Evaluation of activities of the NBS Innovation 
Hub  
NBS, MF SR 30 April 2020 
2.4.2 Enhancement of the activity and position of the 
Centre for financial innovations  
MF SR 30 June 2020, 
continuously  
2.4.3 Analysing benefits and possible utilisation of 
the regulatory sandbox concept  
MF SR, NBS 31 December 
2020 
2.4.4 Analysing needs for crowdfunding regulation  MF SR, NBS 31 December 
2020 
 71 
2.4.5 Analysing possible utilisation of tokenization 
of assets  
MF SR 30 June 2020 
 
3. We will improve abilities of the public administration to innovate and use data for the benefit 
of citizens  
Measure 
designation  
Name of the measure Entities in charge  Deadline  
3.1.1  Modernising and simplification of the 
legislation framework for data – preparation of 
the new act on data  
ODPMII 31 
December 
2022 
3.1.2  Build-up of a consolidated analytical layer and 
providing access to important analytical tools 
for the needs of public administration 
institutions to form public policies based on 
data  
ODPMII 30 June 
2022 
3.1.3  Setting up the system for sharing spatial 
information  
Ministry of 
Environment  
31 
December 
2022 
3.1.4  Testing utilisation of the blockchain technology 
in public administration on pilot projects  
ODPMII 31 
December 
2021 
3.2.1 Drafting the concept of innovation public-
private partnership  
ODPMII 31 
December 
2020 
3.2.2 Setting up a laboratory for better services and 
digital innovations  
ODPMII 31 
December 
2019 
3.2.3 Implementation of activities of the behavioural 
innovations laboratory (BRISK) 
ODPMII 31 
December 
2022 
3.2.4 Setting up of methodological and evaluation 
unit and expert platform to support 
development of smart cities and regions  
ODPMII 31 
December 
2020  
3.2.5 Setting up an office for digital innovations in 
local government  
DEUS 31 
December 
2022 
3.2.6 Setting up the platform for finding innovative 
solutions  
ODPMII 31 
December 
2022 
3.2.7 Providing new opportunities for doing business 
and innovations of public services by means of 
open API  
ODPMII  31 
December 
2022 
 
4. We will support development of artificial intelligence  
Measure 
designation  
Name of the measure Entities in charge  Deadline  
4.1.1 Involvement of the Slovak Republic in the EU 
initiative for building European centres of 
excellence for artificial intelligence  
ODPMII 30 June 
2020, 
continuously 
 72 
4.1.2  Setting up an expert group for coordination of 
educational activities in artificial intelligence  
Ministry of 
Education, ODPMII 
30 June 
2020 
4.1.3  Development of a tool for natural language 
processing  
ODPMII 31 
December 
2020, 
continuously 
4.1.4  Defining themes with the social need and 
preparation of pilot projects with a broad 
support of experts in artificial intelligence  
ODPMII 31 
December 
2020, 
continuously 
4.1.5  Defining and notification of calls for grant 
schemes for basic and applied research focused 
on artificial intelligence  
Ministry of 
Education, ODPMII 
31 
December 
2021, 
continuously  
4.1.6  Introduction of joint education of experts about 
selected aspects of artificial intelligence  
Ministry of 
Education, 
ODPMII  
31 
December 
2020, 
continuously 
4.2.1  Analysis of the regulatory environment for 
artificial intelligence  
ODPMII 31 
December 
2019 
4.2.2  Designing and supporting implementation of 
principles of transparent and ethical use of AI 
ODPMII, Ministry 
of Economy  
31 
December 
2020, 
continuously 
4.2.3  Supporting the development of artificial 
intelligence ecosystem  
ODPMII 31 
December 
2020  
4.2.4 Setting up the permanent committee for ethics 
and regulation of artificial intelligence 
ODPMII, Ministry 
of Economy  
31. 3. 2020  
4.2.5  Preparation of a manual for companies for 
deployment of artificial intelligence  
ODPMII, Ministry 
of Economy  
31 
December 
2020  
4.2.6  Supporting an increase of investments of 
foreign and Slovak companies into research 
activities  
ODPMII, Ministry 
of Education, 
Ministry of 
Economy  
30 June 
2020  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 73 
Annex 1 – Ranking of Slovakia in the DESI index in 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator
Ranking of 
Slovakia
Slovak score EU average Best score Best country
1 Connectivity 23 52,6 59,3 73,6 Denmark
1 a 1 Fixed Broadband coverage 25 88,0% 97,0% 100,0% Cyprus
1 a 2 Fixed Broadband take-up 20 70,0% 77,0% 97,3% Netherlands
1 b 1 4G Coverage 25 87,0% 94,0% 99,6% Netherlands
1 b 2 Mobile Broadband take-up 18 88 96 162,6 Poland
1 b 3 5G Readiness 28 0,0% 14,0% 66,7% Finland
1 c 1 NGA Coverage 17 86,0% 83,0% 100,0% Malta
1 c 2 Fast broadband take-up 20 34,0% 41,0% 76,1% Netherlands
1 d 1 Ultrafast Broadband coverage 11 80,0% 60,0% 99,9% Malta
1 d 2 Ultrafast Broadband take-up 21 13,0% 20,0% 53,9% Sweden
1 e 1 Broadband price index 8 90 87 94,1 Finland
2 Human Capital 18 44,2% 48,0% 77,5% Finland
2 a 1 At least basic digital skills 12 59,0% 57,2% 85,2% Luxembourg
2 a 2 Above basic digital skills 12 33,1% 31,2% 55,3% Luxembourg
2 a 3 At least basic software skills 10 62,9% 60,0% 87,1% Luxembourg
2 b 1 ICT Specialist 19 2,8% 3,7% 6,8% Finland
2 b 2 Female ICT Specialist 23 0,8% 1,4% 3,1% Finland
2 b 3 ICT Graduates 18 3,2% 3,5% 7,1% Finland
3 Use of Internet Services 20 47,9% 53,4% 74,1% Denmark
3 a 1 People who never used the Internet 15 13,3% 11,3% 1,7% Denmark
3 a 2 Internet Users 19 78,5% 83,1% 95,2% Denmark
3 b 1 News 18 77,3% 72,5% 93,0% Lithuania
3 b 2 Music, Videos and Games 26 66,4% 80,6% 93,6% Finland
3 b 3 Video on Demand 17 16,5% 31,3% 60,7% Sweden
3 b 4 Video Calls 14 51,2% 49,2% 83,2% Bulgaria
3 b 5 Social Networks 10 74,4% 65,4% 86,0% Romania
3 b 6 Professional social networks 27 4,8% 15,4% 35,6% Netherlands
3 b 7 Doing an online course 25 4,4% 8,8% 18,4% Sweden
3 b 8 Online consultations and voting 25 4,3% 10,3% 32,9% Luxembourg
3 c 1 Banking 17 61,9% 63,7% 94,0% Finland
3 c 2 Shopping 9 70,9% 68,7% 87,2% UK
3 c 3 Selling online 6 29,5% 22,7% 37,1% Netherlands
4 Integration of digital technology 21 34,5 41,1 68,7 Ireland
4 a 1 Electronic Information Sharing 16 30,6% 33,8% 54,0% Belgium
4 a 2 Social media 17 16,6% 21,4% 42,4% UK
4 a 3 Big data 20 9,4% 12,3% 24,4% Malta
4 a 4 Cloud 20 13,9% 17,8% 50,2% Finland
4 b 1 SMEs selling online 19 12,5% 16,6% 30,8% Denmark
4 b 2 e-Commerce turnover 14 11,0% 10,1% 26,0% Ireland
4 b 3 Selling online cross-border 18 7,6% 8,4% 16,8% Ireland
5 Digital public services 21 53,6 62,9 79,9 Finland
5 a 1 e-Government Users 19 54,0% 64,3% 93,1% Sweden
5 a 2 Pre-filled Forms 22 35,1 57,9 100 Malta
5 a 3 Online Service Completion 24 79,4 87,4 100 Malta
5 a 4 Digital public services for businesses 21 79,9 85,1 100 Denmark
5 a 5 Open Data 8 73,6% 64,0% 87,8% Ireland
5 b 1 e-Health services 15 16,0% 18,0% 49,0% Estonia
5 b 2 Medical data exchange 28 10,0% 43,0% 98,0% Denmark
5 b 3 e-Prescription N/A N/A 50,0% 100,0% Sweden
Current state: 2019
ID
 74 
Annex   – Ranking of Slovakia in the OECD Going Digital Toolkit Index 
 
OECD Going Digital Toolkit - ranking of Slovakia (data from 
2016/2017/2018) 
     
Toolkit indicators: 
1. Access (to communication infrastructure, services and 
data) 
 2. Use (of digital technologies and data) 
 3. Innovations 
 4. Labour  
 5. Society 
 6. Trust (in digital environment) 
 7. Openness of the market 
     
     
     
Indicator 1a: Access - Fixed broadband per 100 inhabitants 
Ranking of Slovakia Slovak score OECD average Best score Best country 
33rd (out of 37) 25.8 30.2 47 Switzerland 
     
Indicator 1b: Access - M2M SIM cards per 100 inhabitants 
Ranking of Slovakia Slovak score OECD average Best score Best country 
19th (out of 34) 11.9 16.6 113.8 Sweden 
     
Indicator 1c: Access - Mobile broadband per 100 inhabitants  
Ranking of Slovakia Slovak score OECD average Best score Best country 
26th (out of 37) 82.8 102.4 163.1 Japan 
     
Indicator 1d: Access - Average monthly mobile data use, Gb 
Ranking of Slovakia Slovak score OECD average Best score Best country 
36th (out of 36) 0.74 Gb 3 Gb 15.9 Gb Finland  
     
Indicator 1e: Access - Share of households with broadband connection  
Ranking of Slovakia Slovak score OECD average Best score Best country 
26th (out of 36) 79% 85.50% 99.50% South Korea 
     
 75 
Indicator 1f: Access - Share of companies with broadband speed of 30 
Mbps or more 
Ranking of Slovakia Slovak score OECD average Best score Best country 
23rd (out of 28) 33.40% 47.70% 74.90% Denmark 
     
     
Indicator 2a: Usage - Internet users 
Ranking of Slovakia Slovak score OECD average Best score Best country 
25th (out of 36) 80.50% 86% 99% Iceland 
     
Indicator 2b: Usage - users using internet connection for interactions with 
public authorities  
Ranking of Slovakia Slovak score OECD average Best score Best country 
28th (out of 37) 51.30% 56.80% 91.50% Denmark 
     
Indicator 2c: Usage - Internet users who purchased online in the past 12 
months 
Ranking of Slovakia Slovak score OECD average Best score Best country 
13th (out of 39) 70.90% 64.20% 87.20% UK 
     
Indicator 2d: Usage - Share of small companies that made e-commerce 
sale in the past 12 months 
Ranking of Slovakia Slovak score OECD average Best score Best country 
26th (out of 34) 13.70% 20.60% 49.70% New Zealand 
     
Indicator 2e: Usage - Share of adults who reached level 2 or higher in 
solving problems in technological environment  
Ranking of Slovakia Slovak score OECD average Best score Best country 
17th (out of 24) 25.60% 30.60% 44.20% New Zealand 
     
     
Indicator 3a: Innovations - Investments in ICT as the percentage share in 
the GDP  
Ranking of Slovakia Slovak score OECD average Best score Best country 
26th (out of 26) 1.01% 2.37% 4.21% Netherlands 
     
Indicator 3b: Innovations - Expenditure on research and development in 
information sectors as the percentage share of the GDP  
Ranking of Slovakia Slovak score OECD average Best score Best country 
 76 
34th (out of 39) 0.06% 0.57% 2.12% Israel 
     
Indicator 3c: Innovations - Venture capital investments in ICT sector as 
the percentage share of the GDP 
Ranking of Slovakia Slovak score OECD average Best score Best country 
22nd (out of 30) 0.000016 0.0184 0.1668 USA 
     
Indicator 3d: Innovations - Share of start-ups (up to 2 years) in the total 
number of businesses 
Ranking of Slovakia Slovak score OECD average Best score Best country 
25th (out of 30) 14.70% 15.50% Greece 25.30% 
     
Indicator 3e: Innovations - Top 10% most quoted documents in computer 
science as the percentage share out of top 10% assessed documents 
Ranking of Slovakia Slovak score OECD average Best score Best country 
31st (out of 36) 4.59% 13.20% 24.80% Luxembourg 
     
     
Indicator 4a: Labour - IKT jobs in the labour market  
Ranking of Slovakia Slovak score OECD average Best score Best country 
24th (out of 29) 6.84% 12.40% 21.70% Luxembourg 
     
Indicator 4b: Labour - Share of digital demanding sectors in the total 
employment  
Ranking of Slovakia Slovak score OECD average Best score Best country 
30th (out of 41) 52.40% 50.20% 56.50% Netherlands 
     
Indicator 4c: Labour - Employees participating in vocational training for 
the job, as the percentage share of the total employment  
Ranking of Slovakia Slovak score OECD average Best score Best country 
22nd (out of 27) 45.80% 59.20% 76.40% Finland 
     
Indicator 4d: Labour - New university graduates in STEM majors as the 
percentage share of fresh graduates  
Ranking of Slovakia Slovak score OECD average Best score Best country 
33rd (out of 40) 21.10% 23,30% 36,00% Germany 
     
Indicator 4e: Labour - Public expenditure on active labour market 
policies as the percentage share of the GDP  
Ranking of Slovakia Slovak score OECD average Best score Best country 
 77 
24th (out of 33) 0.16% 0.36% 0.92% Hungary  
     
     
Indicator 5a: Society - Percentage share of persons aged 55-74 years using 
the internet connection 
Ranking of Slovakia Slovak score OECD average Best score Best country 
27th (out of 35) 50.50% 65.30% 97.30% Iceland 
     
Indicator 5b: Society - Percentage share of Internet users in low-income 
households  
Ranking of Slovakia Slovak score OECD average Best score Best country 
17th (out of 35) 66.30% 72.50% 96.60% Iceland 
     
Indicator 5c: Society - Women who develop programs as the share in all 
16-24-olds 
Ranking of Slovakia Slovak score OECD average Best score Best country 
16th (out of 27) 29.70% 28.00% 37.80% Switzerland  
     
Indicator 5d: Society - Percentage share of individuals using digital 
equipment at work  
Ranking of Slovakia Slovak score OECD average Best score Best country 
16th (out of 23) 25.00% 26.40% 38.00% Iceland 
     
Indicator 5e: Society - Performance of 15-old students in science, 
mathematics and reading 
Ranking of Slovakia Slovak score OECD average Best score Best country 
31st (out of 41) 9.69% 15.30% 25.80% Japan 
     
Indicator 5f: Society - Generated e-waste, in kilograms per inhabitants 
Ranking of Slovakia Slovak score OECD average Best score Best country 
31st (out of 42) 12.30% 17.44% 28.50% Norway 
     
     
Indicator 6a: Trust - Percentage share of Internet users who have come 
across misuse of personal information or violation of privacy  
Ranking of Slovakia Slovak score OECD average Best score Best country 
20th (out of 31) 2.62% 3.20% 7.80% Chile 
     
Indicator 6b: Trust - Percentage share of individuals who do not shop 
online due to concerns about safety of payments  
 78 
Ranking of Slovakia Slovak score OECD average Best score Best country 
21st (out of 27) 14.40% 28.50% 67.50% Portugal 
     
Indicator 6c: Trust - Percentage share of individuals who do not shop 
online due to concerns about returning product  
Ranking of Slovakia Slovak score OECD average Best score Best country 
16th (out of 27) 14.80% 18.70% 48.30% Portugal 
     
Indicator 6d: Trust - Percentage share of companies that use 
predominantly inhouse capacities for their ICT security and data 
protection  
Ranking of Slovakia Slovak score OECD average Best score Best country 
21st (out of 24) 19.10% 23.70% 40.50% Latvia 
     
     
Indicator 7a: Openness of the market - Share of companies that do cross 
border e-commerce  
Ranking of Slovakia Slovak score OECD average Best score Best country 
15th (out of 26) 47.10% 45.30% 67.40% Austria 
     
Indicator 7b: Openness of the market - Share of mostly digital provided 
services in the market with end-user commercial services 
Ranking of Slovakia Slovak score OECD average Best score Best country 
29th (out of 36) 17.60% 30.80% 73.10% Luxembourg 
     
Indicator 7c: Openness of the market - Added value of digitally 
demanding services contained in exports of manufacturing as the 
percentage share of the added value of exports of manufacturing  
Ranking of Slovakia Slovak score OECD average Best score Best country 
10th (out of 44) 23.70% 24.90% 43.90% Luxembourg 
     
Indicator 7d: Openness of the market - Restrictions of the market with 
digital services  
Ranking of Slovakia Slovak score OECD average Best score Best country 
8th (out of 44) 0.10% 0.40% 0.49% China 
     
Indicator 7e: Openness of the market - Restriction regulatory index for 
foreign direct investments  
Ranking of Slovakia Slovak score OECD average Best score Best country 
21st (out of 44) 0.05% 0.07% 0.32% China 
 
