Hungary’s Artificial 
Intelligence Strategy 
2020-2030
May 2020
Table of Contents
Minister’s Greeting 5
Executive Summary 6
1 Why is an AI strategy necessary? 9
 1.1 Personal, deep, disrupting 9
 1.2 Transformation of the labour market 10
 1.3 Opportunity to boost economic growth and competitiveness 11
 1.4 Solid European cooperation and global competition 12
 1.5 An issue of national sovereignty 13
2 Where do we stand now and what can we build on? 14
 2.1 Already proven fields of use 14
 2.2 What we can build on 15
 2.3 Things to watch out for 16
3 What are the objectives? 17
 3.1 Target system 17
 3.2 Defined target indicators 19
 3.3 The relationship between the AI Strategy 
   and other government strategies 21
4 What are we doing? 22
 4.1 Foundation pillars 23
   4.1.1 Promoting data economy 24
   4.1.2 Research, development and innovation  26 
     – “Joint forces for development”   
   4.1.3 Incentivising uptake  29
     – “Widespread use” 
   4.1.4 Education, competence development and societal preparedness  30 
     – “Focusing on human competencies” 
   4.1.5 Infrastructure development  33 
     – “Stable and Accessible Infrastructure” 
   4.1.6 Regulatory and Ethical Framework  34
     – “Reliable, regulated use” 
5
 4.2 Sector-specific focus areas 35
   4.2.1 Manufacturing and autonomous systems  35 
     – “Smart, personalised, environmentally conscious manufacturing” 
   4.2.2 Data-driven healthcare  36 
     – “More accurate diagnostics, more effective treatment” 
   4.2.3 Integrated, digital agriculture  37 
     – “Innovative, data-driven, AI-supported agricultural management” 
   4.2.4 Public Administration  38
     – “Data-driven public administration”
   4.2.5 Energy  39
     – “Data-based, personalised energy supply”
   4.2.6 Logistics  39
     – “Supply Chain integrated through AI applications”
   4.2.7 Transport  40 
     – “Development of real-time management with AI support” 
 4.3 Transformative programs 41
   4.3.1 Self-driving vehicles – autonomous systems 41
   4.3.2 Health consciousness in a digital world 41
   4.3.3 Climate-driven agriculture 42
   4.3.4 Data wallet and personalized services 43
   4.3.5 AI-supported development of personal competences 44
   4.3.6 Automated customer service in Hungarian 44
   4.3.7 Energy networks focused on renewable sources of energy 45
5 Annexes  46
 5.1 Action plan 46
Minister’s Greeting
Beyond doubt, in 2020 the technology of artificial intel-
ligence (AI) has become part of our everyday lives. The 
integration of AI-based technologies in the economy 
and society is accelerating. The unavoidable changes 
accompanying  the spread of the technology offer major 
opportunities for sustaining and increasing the level of 
Hungarian economic growth, improving the com pe ti tive-
ness of the Hungarian corporate sector, developing busi-
ness and public administration processes aimed at users, 
and for achieving environmental and climate protection 
targets supported with state-of-the-art technologies.
The Hungarian Artificial Intelligence Coalition was es tab-
lished in October 2018 to offer a community and forum for 
all stakeholders in the Hungarian AI ecosystem who wish 
to make an active contribution to the development of the 
Hungarian AI environment and skills. This Strategy is the 
joint, action-oriented product of the Coalition’s professional 
community, consisting of over 240 organizations and 1,000 
delegated experts. The creation of the Strategy initiated 
an exemplary bottom-up cooperation and market creation 
among the stakeholders, as part of which an action plan was 
developed as early as in the autumn of 2019 to perform tasks 
not requiring government decisions. The implementation of 
the Strategy is also based on this cooperation.
This document represents a living strategy that reflects 
the agreement and will of state, academic, market and 
social stakeholders to take action. The Strategy requires 
continuous oversight and fine-tuning in consideration of 
the joint lessons learned in the course of implementation 
and the forecast revolutionary innovations of AI technology. 
By way of this document, the Government affirms its 
commitment to developing Hungarian artificial  intelligence
– as a special branch of its digitalization efforts – to be 
high- tech and green, in line with our general development 
objectives. In other words, we aim to make the most of the 
opportunities offered by modern technologies for improving 
the quality of life of citizens and protecting the environment.
I sincerely believe that this Strategy and the successful 
implementation of the social, technological, economic and 
personal changes it envisages will play a crucial role in 
Hungary’s future.
Prof. Dr. László Palkovics
Minister for Innovation and Technology  
6 7
Artificial intelligence (AI) – as the sum of algorithmic systems capable of teaching and 
improving themselves based on input data – carries long-awaited potential for change in 
relation to economic and social processes. The mapping of certain segments of human skills 
by learning machines also offers a practically unprecedented improvement to the efficiency 
of the economy and administration, and to our private lives. The changes are inevitable and 
can be experienced directly by anyone in the 21st century.
The extent to which states and communities within these can effectively exploit these 
benefits depends on forward-looking and comprehensive planning, ambitious goals and 
their methodical implementation. Both the economy and society must be prepared for the 
approaching changes. 
Executive Summary
Economy
Effective implementation of artificial intelligence through 
processes based on the skills of a knowledge-based society 
significantly contributes to economic growth. According 
to forecasts, by 2030 an AI adoption rate of 11.5% in the 
Southern European region, including Hungary, could 
generate a GDP added value of HUF 6,400 billion to the 
national economy.
Competitiveness
The combination of human labour skills with artificial 
intelligence can benefit the Hungarian corporate sector in 
several ways. In the case of repetitive, highly standardised 
work processes, it can lead to a faster and more accurate 
performance. In relation to tasks typically requiring human 
skills, it can support jobs that are data-driven and allow 
greater human creativity.
The AI Strategy aims to make a significant contribution to 
objectives also defined in the Strategy for Strengthening 
Hungarian Micro, Small and Medium-sized Enterprises by 
enhancing the productivity, further added value and export 
capacity of Hungarian enterprises.
Societal challenges
According to the results of the Hungarian labour market 
survey conducted within the framework of the AI Coalition, 
the spread of AI-based technologies may affect up to 
900,000 jobs in Hungary by the 2030s. This equals roughly 
one quarter of all current jobs. According to certain 
expert estimates, more than 40% of jobs can already be 
automated at the moment, thus the transition may lead to 
the replacement of human labour (as a result, some jobs 
may vanish or change in nature and new jobs may emerge 
requiring new competences).
Systems applying AI ideally only complement and strength-
en the skills of human workers, leading to the desired 
improvement in efficiency. Harmonious coop eration 
between man and AI, however, is conditional on the appro-
priate preparation of Hungarian workers and Hungarian 
citizens in general, the forecasting of labour market trends, 
and support for adoption and transition.
International environment
International trends in AI regulation reveal growing activity. 
Most countries with developed economies have already 
adopted AI-related strategy papers or are in the process of 
adopting such a document.  Between 2018 and 2019, the 
European Union drew up the document entitled Coordinated 
Plan on Artificial Intelligence, which recommends that each 
Member State adopt a separate AI strategy or supplement 
other relevant strategies with a dedicated AI section as early 
as 2019. Between 2018 and 2019, the OECD, the European 
Council and UNESCO expressed the need to draft a separate 
AI regulatory instrument. The European Commission issued 
the “White Paper On Artificial Intelligence: a European 
approach to excellence and trust” in February 2020, which 
assesses the possible regulatory framework of artificial 
intelligence in Europe.
Existing Hungarian capabilities
There are already a number of initiatives applying AI in 
Hungary or laying the foundations for its future use (e.g. 
chatbot customer service, precision agriculture appli cations, 
predictive maintenance systems, fleet route opti mization, 
inventory forecasting, medical diagnostics) and a number 
of frameworks are available that significantly contribute to 
supporting the future introduction of AI (auto nomous vehicle 
testing environment, integrated health data sets, central 
identification service). By building on these initiatives, we 
have good prospects of achieving substantial progress in the 
application and further development of artificial intelligence. 
Retraining and upskilling will be a key in the Hungarian labour 
market until the 2030s in the 21st century renewal of our 
skills system. Regarding the current activity of the National 
Employment Service (hereinafter “NES”), there must be a 
shift towards competence based recruitment both in the 
assessment of supply and demand, for example through 
the adoption of ESCO classification and AI technologies of 
employment services.
The Artificial Intelligence Strategy
Recognising the potential benefits of the technology and simultaneously taking into account the possible related 
challenges, the Government of Hungary has resolved to have a comprehensive Artificial Intelligence Strategy (hereinafter 
“Strategy”) drawn up. The document sets goals up to 2030 and outlines a related action plan extending up to 2025. It 
is important to emphasise, however, that the Strategy needs to be regarded as a living document and reviewed at least 
every two years due to rapid technological development and growing experience related to the spread of applications.
The Strategy proposes the following main groups of measures.
Foundation pillars
The so-called foundation pillars of the Strategy prepare 
society to manage inevitable changes resulting from AI 
effectively and to fully exploit the advantages of the tech-
nology.
The foundation pillars aim to establish the internal and 
external conditions of AI development in Hungary. The AI 
value chain covers the internal conditions. Elements of the 
AI value chain are: 
• support for the data economy ensuring access to public 
and private data;
• building a community of basic and demand-driven 
researchers and developers;
• building an ecosystem supporting the individual and 
corporate use of technology.
The AI frameworks provide the “external” conditions nec-
essary for the above processes. These are:
• human skills necessary for the confident use of AI;
• availability of software and hardware resources;
• a clear regulatory environment that supports further 
development and innovation.
8 9
Focus areas
The measures defined within the framework of the sectoral 
and technological focus areas aim to strengthen the growth 
potential of the Hungarian economy and to improve its 
efficiency in a targeted and conscious manner
• through the use of available AI technologies, on the  
one hand;
• and the development of future technologies, on the other.
Within the framework of a sector and technology-driven 
approach, the Strategy assigns priority to sectors that can 
be most effectively improved by AI-based applications: 
manufacturing, agriculture, healthcare, public admi nist-
ration, logistics, transport and energy.
In relation to the above, based on current Hungarian 
capabilities, the Strategy defines the R&D areas that can 
contribute the most to the technological support of the 
above-mentioned sectors and where Hungary can also gain 
advantage at an international level.
Transformative programmes
The long-term plans – defined as transformative pro-
grammes and setting very ambitious objectives – make it 
possible that the additional benefits of the implementation 
produce extra value for citizens even before these 
programmes are “closed”. This category of measures 
does not include programmes in a traditional sense, but 
rather complex means-end schemes provided in a form 
that is readily comprehensible for society as a whole. The 
directions outlined here show the ambitious path Hungary 
is to take for the stakeholders of both the Hungarian and 
international AI ecosystems.
The transformative programmes provide a long-term point 
of orientation in relation to matters of national strategic 
relevance such as
• energy and agricultural challenges induced by climate 
change;
• the spread of autonomous systems and the labour 
market;
• the relationship between citizens and the data-based 
economy; or
• the need for developing the modern digital service 
provider state.
Considering the very diverse possibilities for applying 
AI, this Strategy approaches the sum of its goals as a 
horizontal initiative that spans different fields. Accordingly, 
the detailed elaboration of the objectives defined for certain 
areas by the Strategy, the working out of related measures 
and the determination of necessary instruments remain 
the option and responsibility of competent stakeholders 
within the respective sectors. Therefore, the primary task 
of the organisations to be set up within the framework of 
this Strategy is to provide the AI support to the independent 
initiatives of these sector stakeholders, in line with the 
goals they define.
Artificial intelligence is a piece of software capable of mapping parts of human intelligence, 
and supporting or autonomously performing processes of sensing, interpreting, decision-
making and action. The technology offers special capabilities and is closely followed at both 
the economic and social level. 
The progress achieved by AI, as technology1, in the past 10 years is often observed as the start of a new industrial revolution. 
In this case, however, progress is not dependent on natural resources; instead, the competence of the available human 
resources determines its limits. This technology affects everybody; it radically transforms expectations of the labour 
market, opens up new dimensions for improving efficiency and offers the potential for substantial economic growth. 
Development, however, is achieved in a global, competitive environment and raises a number of sovereignty issues. 
Hungary is thus offered a historical opportunity and challenge. 
1
Why is an AI strategy necessary?
Artificial intelligence is an abstract technology but everyone 
is affected. We are personally affected because many fears, 
expectations and concerns are already associated with AI; 
it is impossible to ignore the topic. Although the technology 
is already applied in our day-to-day lives, in our work and 
enhancing our entertainment, in its most tangible form AI 
enables certain segments of man’s most important ability, 
intelligence, to be learnt by machines. Therefore, the 
development of AI raises fundamental but also practical 
philosophical questions and encourages coordinated action 
at a completely new level, the reconsideration of business 
process flows and jobs, and the introduction of norms and 
regulation at a social level.
Artificial intelligence will be integrated in all layers of our 
life, economy and society, with a potential for profound and 
fundamental changes. It is possible to obtain basic infor-
mation on AI anywhere and to use devices with integrated 
AI. The business process flows and jobs deve loped with 
AI modules, however, will fundamentally call coordination 
processes, regulatory frameworks and forms of social 
cooperation into question.
AI is a global technology, without borders or a need for 
physical resources. Due to global competition for and 
conti nuous interest in talented people, a large part of 
basic development is open source. For this reason, an 
innovation introduced in technology or a business model is 
able to spread around the world in a matter of weeks or 
months questioning and disrupting processes and habits 
we believe to be natural. AI will certainly play an important 
role in tackling one of the biggest challenges of our day: 
global climate change. The opportunities offered by AI may 
be effective in reducing greenhouse gas emissions and 
in implementing measures helping our adaptation to the 
effects of climate change.
These processes will create a world that demands con-
tinuous adaptation, awareness of innovation and learning 
during our entire lives. The progress achieved by AI, as 
technology, in the past 10 years is often observed as the 
start of a new industrial revolution. In this case, however, 
progress is not dependent on natural resources; instead, the 
competence of the available human resources determines 
its limits. This technology affects everybody; it radically 
transforms expectations of the labour market, opens up 
new dimensions for improving efficiency and offers the 
potential for substantial economic growth. Development, 
however, is achieved in a global, competitive environment 
and raises a number of sovereignty issues. Hungary is thus 
offered a historical opportunity and challenge.
1.1    Personal, deep, disrupting
1 In this document, artificial intelligence is understood to mean “narrow” AI, i.e. systems only capable of mapping specific areas of human intelligence. Research into 
“general” AI – capable of mapping the entire human intelligence – remains underdeveloped and uncertain, and is therefore not applicable within this context
10 11
In close combination with the topic of automation, in the 
near future AI will substantially transform the labour market 
and expectations related to the competencies necessary 
for work.2 By the end of the 2030s, automation and AI are 
expected to affect 900,000 workers in Hungary.3 According 
to certain expert estimates, more than 40% of jobs can 
already be automated in Hungary4, thus the implementation 
of the transition may result in the replacement of labour. 
The spread of AI, however, not only results in the elimination 
of jobs but also changes the competencies necessary for 
existing jobs, creating opportunities for filling new jobs. 
In the coming decades three successive waves of AI and 
automation are expected:
The so-called algorithm wave – lasting until the mid-
2020s – will affect sectors based on data processing, such 
as the financial sector, IT related sectors and administrative 
jobs. The workers typically affected are young people and 
women. This wave is expected to affect 5-10% of jobs on 
average. 
The augmentation wave – between 2025 and 2030 – will 
affect service sectors relying on office work, such as the 
financial sector, education, public administration and IT 
based services. This wave is expected to affect 15-20% of 
jobs in the given sectors. As a difference compared to the 
first wave, the proportion of affected women and men is 
expected to be identical, with a higher proportion of more 
experienced, middle-aged workers. 
The third wave is expected to arrive in the 2030s. 
The so-called autonomy wave, is expected to impact 
manufacturing, on the one hand, and highly complex 
jobs involving responsibility on the other. This wave is 
expected to produce the biggest impact, affecting 25-30% 
of jobs, mainly men and more experienced workers. The 
most significant changes are expected in manufacturing, 
where 384,500 jobs could be exposed to these changes, 
and the spread of AI technology will affect 107,900 jobs in 
goods transportation and additionally 106,600 jobs in the 
construction sector. Automation and AI will mostly affect 
skilled workers and labourers; these jobs are expected 
to be completely transformed during the third, autonomy 
wave. This means that the nature of the work of every third 
skilled worker and labourer will change. The changes will 
also impact the group of machine operators, and more than 
149,000 such employees will face challenges until the end 
of the next decade. 
A change of such magnitude requires coordinated prepa-
ration at a societal level, with everybody’s involvement. In 
the planning, preparation and implementation of develop-
ment projects, the relevant organisational units of the NES 
need to play an important role in the appropriate forecasting 
of and support for labour market trends resulting from the 
technological transition.
1.2    Transformation of the labour market
Algorithm wave Augmentation wave Autonomy wave
2 PwC UK - Will robots really steal our jobs? (Arntz, M. T. Gregory and U. Zierahn (2016), ‘The risk of automation for jobs in OECD countries: a comparative analysis’, OECD 
Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers)
3 PwC Magyarország Kft. (2019): How will AI impact the Hungarian labour market. https://www.pwc.com/hu/en/publications/assets/How-will-AI-impact-the-Hungarian-
labour-market.pdf
4 Grace Lordan: Robots at work – A report on automatable and non-automatable employment shares in Europe, London School of Economics and Political Science, 2018
AI is able to raise the productivity of employees and processes 
to a new level, offering major potential for economic growth. 
Since the improvement of labour productivity may reach 
40% by 2030 in certain countries, major investments are 
under way to increase export capacities and added value 
available in this form.
Additionally, Hungary is a popular target in the Central 
Eastern European region for the outsourcing of workflows 
with high added value. The failure to adopt AI  may pose a 
risk to that status if economies currently providing lower 
added value are more successful in adopting AI-based 
applications and will therefore be able to produce higher 
added value with lower operating costs.
A good indicator of the global economic activity is that the 
annual amount of venture capital investments related to 
AI has increased six-fold during the past 20 years (since 
2000).6 Revenues from the global AI software market are 
expected to increase from 10.1 billion USD in 2018 to 126 
billion USD by 2025.7 The application of AI is expected to 
increase mainly in consumer internet-based services, the 
automotive industry, financial and telecommunications 
sectors and trade.
Global GDP is expected to be 14-16% higher by 2030 – 
amounting to 13,000–15,000 billion USD – owing to the 
steadily accelerating spread of AI-based technologies.8,9,10  
The estimated effects, however, vary significantly between 
geographical regions. AI is expected to increase the GDP 
by 26.1% in China, by 14.5% in North America, by 9.9% in 
Northern Europe and by 11.5% in Southern Europe.11
At the time of preparing the above study, based on the ratio 
of Hungarian GDP to global GDP in 2017, an additional 
GDP increase of HUF 6,400 billion is estimated in 2030 
in Hungary, in consideration of the average expected 
increase in the Southern European region. In the table 
below, we present Hungary’s expected increase in GDP 
by following the AI application models indicated for other 
regions involved in research.
These figures clearly show how investment in increasing the 
Hungarian adoption rate can contribute to a GDP increase 
in an order of magnitude of one thousand billion forints 
by 2030. Based on the technology’s economic and social 
relevance and the dynamics of its spread, it is essential for 
Hungary to exploit the opportunities offered by AI proactively 
as well.
1.3    Opportunity to boost economic growth and competitiveness
Analysed region
Expected GDP 
increase induced 
by AI application 
(as a proportion of 
GDP in 2030)
Expected Hungarian GDP 
increase (HUF bn) by 
reaching the given region’s 
adoption rate (2030)
Latin America 5.4% 3,005
Northern Europe 9.9% 5,508
Southern Europe 11.5% 6,399
North America 14.5% 8,068
China 26.1% 14,523
Global average 14% 7,623
5 https://www.accenture.com/hu-en/insight-artificial-intelligence-future-growth
6 https://techjury.net/stats-about/ai/
7 https://www.tractica.com/newsroom/press-releases/artificial-intelligence-software-market-to-reach-126-0-billion-in-annual-worldwide-revenue-by-2025/
8 https://www.forbes.com/sites/andrewcave/2019/06/24/can-the-ai-economy-really-be-worth-150-trillion-by-2025/#49ec4adf3bf4
9 https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/artificial-intelligence/notes-from-the-ai-frontier-modeling-the-impact-of-ai-on-the-world-economy
10 https://www.itu.int/dms_pub/itu-s/opb/gen/S-GEN-ISSUEPAPER-2018-1-PDF-E.pdf
11 https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/news-room/docs/report-pwc-ai-analysis-sizing-the-prize.pdf
12 13
A growing number of countries are recognising the depth 
of changes attributable to accelerating competition and 
technology, and are defining their own concepts concerning 
the development of AI. The European Union drew up a 
coordinated plan on artificial intelligence in 2018 and 2019, 
which outlines how the EU plans to contribute to the AI 
development of Member States in relation to individual 
components of the AI value chain.12 In the 2021-2027 
budgetary period of the Union, an adopted national AI 
Strategy of a Member State can substantially support 
successful tendering for centrally distributed, AI-related 
support. The coordinated plan recommends that each 
Member State adopt a separate AI strategy or supplement 
other relevant strategies with a dedicated AI section as 
early as 2019.
In May 2019, Member states of the OECD adopted the 
recommendations of the Council on artificial intelligence13 
that define principles relating to reliable and human-
centric AI, and encourage member states to support AI 
development and the wide-ranging use of the technology 
with long-term investments. In early 2020, the organisation 
also launched a separate network consisting of AI experts 
(ONE AI), which held its first meeting at the end of February 
2020.
In June 2019, Ministers of the G20 group adopted “human-
centred AI principles” based on the work performed by the 
OECD.14 
By focusing on the question of human rights, in September 
2019 the European Council convened the first meeting of the 
AI Ad Hoc Committee (CAHAI)15, which is mainly responsible 
for examining options for the broad framework regulation 
of AI development, planning and application, together with 
multiple stakeholders.
Within the framework of the UN, at the 40th Session of the 
UNESCO General Conference – dealing with educational 
and cultural matters – held on 21 November 2019, the 
Social Science Committee accepted without any changes 
the recommendations of the study on the ethics of artificial 
intelligence, relating to the drafting of an international 
normative instrument. Accordingly, in January 2020, the 
organisation set up a task force to draft a global, AI focused 
legal instrument.
Without exception, developed states have recognised 
the significance of AI and have accordingly started the 
development of the necessary regulatory environment, in 
which a separate AI strategy is often a central element.
On 25 April 2018, Hungary signed the Declaration of 
cooperation on Artificial Intelligence, together with 24 
other European states, which sets out the intention of 
the signatories to cooperate in the field of European AI 
development and AI-supported innovation.16 The Coor-
dinated Plan on Artificial Intelligence of the European 
Union was prepared in December 201817; it made strong 
recommendations for all Member States to adopt separate 
AI Strategies in 2019 or supplement their other relevant 
strategies with an AI footing.
Recognising the potential of AI and mindful of its impact 
on economic development, AI is a key area of the European 
Commission’s digital policy. The 2021-2027 multi-year 
budget assigns a priority to supporting AI: it is one of the key 
areas of funding in the draft regulation on the establishment 
of the Digital Europe Programme in the 2021-2027 period. 
In the 2021-2027 budgetary period of the EU, programmes 
with centrally distributed funds are expected to have greater 
emphasis, therefore it is a major advantage if, in the course 
of awarding funds, tenderers from the given Member State 
are able to demonstrate their state’s commitment to the 
given field. In relation to artificial intelligence: this means 
that the availability of a comprehensive AI Strategy is in 
practice a prerequisite for funding successful tenders. 
1.4    Solid European cooperation and global competition
12 https://ec.europa.eu/knowledge4policy/publication/coordinated-plan-artificial-intelligence-com2018-795-final_en
13 https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECD-LEGAL-0449
14 https://www.mofa.go.jp/files/000486596.pdf
15 https://www.coe.int/en/web/artificial-intelligence/cahai
16 https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/eu-member-states-sign-cooperate-artificial-intelligence
17 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/HU/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:52018DC0795&from=EN
New methods of attack and influence appear in a digital 
world, which create new forms of vulnerability and endanger 
the self-determination and autonomy of the individual, 
the community and the state. With the spread of artificial 
intelligence and the potential abuse of AI, these threats are 
increasing in strength and appearing in new forms.
AI creates new targets and methods of attack in the field of 
cyber defence, where the race to obtain data is expressed 
through intensifying economic and political attacks. At the 
same time, artificial intelligence enables more sophis ti ca-
ted, complex operations based on influencing, which direct-
ly target citizens and raise new issues in both regulation 
and oversight. 
When integrating technologies with everyday processes, it 
is necessary to examine the critical processes and regu-
latory framework that can ensure the integrity of the 
interests of citizens and communities. As the quality of data 
is a key factor in teaching artificial intelligence, special 
attention needs to be paid to the protection of socially and 
economically critical data, and the guarantee of the right 
to self-determination and freedom in line with European 
values.  
Actors in public administration need to make coordinated 
efforts to address the above threats and risks, and to 
prepare society for the conscious and responsible use of 
the technology. 
It is clear that, in order to achieve the dynamic pace of 
development of artificial intelligence as a technology, its 
potential for economic growth and effective involvement 
in international processes, it is essential for Hungary 
to clearly express its position on the subject and set its 
priorities regarding technology-related details.
1.5    An issue of national sovereignty
14 15
Telecommunications
• automated customer service with 
phonebots and chatbots
• forecasting failures in the network 
infrastructure
• tailored sales offers for customers
• AI-supported tailoring of marketing 
messages
• automated CV screening and video 
interview analysis
• calibration of network coverage by 
deploying self-learning antennas
Banking and insurance
• automatic answering of incoming 
e-mails using language processing
• support of credit analysts with 
analysis of financial risks
• AI-supported photo-ID 
authentication process
• modelling the occurrence of 
possible damage events
• preliminary processing of incoming 
claims
• identification of fraud and abuse by 
analysing transaction patterns
Retail
• forecasting inventory levels
• forecasting the formation and 
reduction of checkout queues, 
• personalised advertisements 
advertising in stores based on age 
and sex identification
• dynamic pricing system
To define the target system of the AI Strategy, it is necessary to identify those capabilities with the greatest potential for 
supporting the research, development, application and use of AI in Hungary. This chapter of the Strategy not only presents 
the areas in which AI-based technologies are already used and which can thus be used to develop additional capabilities 
but also provides an overview analysis of Hungary’s strengths, weaknesses and opportunities, and the risks of application 
in this area.
2
Where do we stand now  
and what can we build on?
AI technology can be broadly used; its application in Hungary is already underway. The integration of available technologies 
and drawing on the related experience at an organisational and sectoral level is ongoing. The non-exhaustive list below 
includes AI projects already implemented or in progress in Hungary:
2.1    Already proven fields of use
Transport / logistics
• automated warehousing system 
with autonomous vehicles
• continuous route optimisation to 
increase fleet utilisation
• reporting of railway obstacles + 
trash along the railway track
• development of data processing in 
self-driving vehicles
• automatic rail transport
Manufacturing
• forecasting manufacturing unit 
faults using sensor data
• defect detection using visual 
recognition
• production capacity optimisation
• reduction of inventories using 
demand forecasting
• image-based, high-precision 
automatic robot positioning 
Agriculture
• autonomous control of agricultural 
machinery
• precision landspreading of 
pesticides and plant nutrients
• identification of crop problems by 
analysing drone images
• identification of sick animals using 
camera movement analysis
• weight estimation with camera 
imagery
• automatic dosage of nutrients based 
on individual needs of animals
In addition to the introduction of the technologies already in use, it is important to examine 
the capabilities available in Hungary that will support the future ecosystem; data assets, 
regulation, infrastructure and government. 
2.2    What we can build on
Energy
• forecasting energy consumption
• supporting network maintenance 
using drone image analysis
• forecasting retail network 
consumption and personal 
recommendations
• processing invoice images using 
software robots
Healthcare
• analysis of mammography images, 
recognition of diseases
• identification of possible medication 
needs based on open data
• recommendation of new active 
substance structures using learning 
systems
• analysis of national healthcare 
patterns 
Public administration
• AI-supported identification with help 
of the Central Client Authentication 
Agent
• drawing up of minutes using 
dictation
• self-service Government Window 
administration
• online self-service administration 
with the support of an expertise 
system
• crime prevention with the support of 
big data based behavioural analysis
• testing autonomous vehicles in a 
military environment
• cybersecurity protection using AI 
algorithms
At the present time the above examples are isolated; often only a few organizations apply these methods within a sector. 
Nevertheless, they clearly show that Hungary already has solid foundations for introducing the technology. Hence, the 
Strategy must primarily focus on the spread and application of continuously expanding opportunities. 
The vibrant, diverse and active domestic AI ecosystem 
is an advantage, especially in the field of autonomous 
vehicle development. Active cooperation has evolved in 
several sec tors (manufacturing, agriculture, healthcare, 
transport, logistics, autonomous systems) between 
university re search networks and centres of excellence, 
and market players.
In the field of data collection there has been a number of 
supportive developments in the public sector that allow 
the use of AI. There is a unique wealth and integration of 
data in both education and healthcare, but the exploitation 
of AI applications based on these is still at an early stage. 
The agricultural machinery fleet is commonly fitted with 
young and modern technologies that enable the integrated 
management and use of data derived from the precision 
economy. 
Regulation of the testing of autonomous vehicles on public 
roads is a specialty, which, subject to an authorisation 
process, enables testing in road traffic without a territorial 
or time limit. This also contributes to the organisation of 
the ongoing developments in the ecosystem and to the 
connection of autonomous transport and vehicle control 
with the international development market.
In terms of infrastructure, we can rely on broadband 
internet coverage in Hungary, which is good by European 
comparison. As a result of the international connections 
of the Hungarian research network (e.g. CERN), Hungary 
already offers available computing capacities that are 
currently complemented with high performance computing 
(HPC) capabilities. The autonomous vehicle and smart city 
test track in Zalaegerszeg represents a key infrastructure 
element, capable of integrating the digital and physical 
world in order to create flexible testing opportunities.18 
18 https://zalazone.hu
16 17
The broad portfolio of the regulated electronic admin-
istrative services (REAS-s) is similarly an advantage 
that facilitates the transition to digital administration for 
public administration actors, standardises legally adopted 
technologies and creates economies of scale. The Central 
Client Authentication Agent (KAÜ), as a service providing 
electronic authentication for citizens, is the starting point 
for all web-based management of public administration 
and the opening up of the service to market players is a 
further opportunity of use. 
In the field of AI development, the comparative international 
wage advantage of the labour force available in high-level 
research and other knowledge-intensive fields, the ease 
of entering the AI technology market, macroeconomic 
stability, proximity to European R&D networks and the 
ability to channel domestic AI innovative solutions into EU 
regulation and development, as well as actively shaping 
them, is clearly an opportunity for Hungary. 
The AI Strategy contains a proposal for mitigating the effects 
of identified weaknesses. In these cases, special attention 
must be paid to opening up the operation of data assets, 
strengthening the start-up ecosystem, strengthening 
the culture of experimentation (especially in the field of 
digital competencies) and reducing global vulnerability in 
Hungarian language processing, data management and the 
use of platform technologies.
As a weakness, we have to face the fact that, in Hungary, 
development projects related to AI are isolated, uncoor-
dinated and there are no actors with comprehensive 
knowledge of them. Additional integration is therefore 
needed in this area. Data assets in public administration 
are still only accessible with limitations, isolated and only 
partially capable of cooperation; data sets with a multiplying 
effect are still unable to boost the economy.
Organization of the start-up ecosystem has only been un-
der going strong development in recent years; Hungarian 
AI start-ups do not play a major role in the global market. 
The practice and implementation framework of marketing 
knowledge capital created at higher education institutions 
is still lacking; as such we have yet to witness the launch of 
dynamic and economically viable start-ups.
There is also room for development in the entrepreneurial 
culture; both individuals and enterprises lack confidence 
in innovation and experimentation19, which are also 
critical for the adoption of new technologies. In terms of 
digital competencies, paper-based operations can still be 
observed in many places alongside some digitally advanced 
enterprises. The digital competence of Hungarian society 
fares poorly by European comparison.20 Additional efforts 
are needed in these areas for the introduction of AI.
Hungary’s vulnerability to global service providers is a risk; 
it does not have its own platform technology with which it 
could already operate confidently in the areas of competition 
determining the future. It should be taken into consideration 
that relatively few people speak Hungarian and therefore 
the global market is not interested in the market-based 
production of high-quality Hungarian language processing. 
This may weaken use of the Hungarian language in the 
digital age. There is also a danger of lagging behind in 
global competition, especially in the development of more 
intensive or effective AI in the field of both civil and defence 
technologies of offshore and nearshore countries compared 
to domestic ones.
2.3    Things to watch out for
19 https://ec.europa.eu/docsroom/documents/35894
20 https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/scoreboard/hungary
Let’s use and develop artificial intelligence 
together, in a responsible manner, as global 
partners, to serve our daily routine. 
Artificial intelligence is already a technology of the 
present.  
It builds into our everyday devices, it transforms our 
business procedures and has a huge impact on society, 
even though the intense development of the technology has 
just begun. The spread of the prepared technologies is still 
in its infancy; the technologies that are under development 
hold out or threaten further breakthroughs, and its effect 
has only just started to unfold at an ever-accelerating pace. 
Learning together
Artificial intelligence transforms people’s lives. 
Hungary aims at putting the opportunities of the appli-
cations of artificial intelligence into the Hungarian 
people’s service uniformly, and along with concentrated 
efforts, and at the same time, it wants to defend people 
against the technological and social risks. We have to 
prepare together for an era full of new challenges and 
opportunities, and we have to find balance together in such 
areas that are brought up and created by the continuously 
developing technology. 
In order to participate in this transformation together and 
in a competent manner, everybody shall find his or her 
role, and we must bring the technology closer through 
education, trainings and the promotion of experimentation 
with AI. Besides, we start AI programmes bringing changes 
in people’s life and having effects at a social level, which are 
inspiring, spectacular, effective, and have a leading spirit 
even at a European level. 
Developing and using it effectively
AI will be decisive for economic competitiveness. 
The Government of Hungary intends to support Hungarian 
enterprises and those enterprises that are operating here 
and create future workplaces in a focused and dynamic 
manner, by building on the existing competitive advantages 
and by gaining a position in the currently developing 
industries. For this reason, we have started a widespread 
programme for the development of the data economy, and 
the introduction of the application and construction of the 
technology, and in its framework researchers, developers 
and adopters can find, in close cooperation, how they 
can best react to the continuously changing domestic 
and international market environment by using the new 
opportunities provided by AI. Hungary sees great potential 
in the use of AI technologies in the less digitalised sectors 
and layers, so it considers AI as a potential breakout point 
in the course of accelerating digitalisation efforts. 
The Strategy assessed and presented the above Hungarian and international situation relating to artificial intelligence, 
with a separate discussion of existing strengths and opportunities for development. Based on the identified situational 
picture, in this chapter the Strategy defines the objectives to be fulfilled by adoption of the Strategy, including their defining 
principles and the target indicators set for the period covered by the Strategy.
3
What are the objectives?
3.1    Targets  
18 19
In a responsible manner,  
in a formalised structure
AI fundamentally effects the whole of society and 
determines its management and service. 
The Government of Hungary is introducing the use of the 
technology into the services provided by the state and 
establishing the frameworks of responsible development 
and use deliberately, consistently, and in a formalised 
structure. For this reason, it is establishing and motivating 
the responsible management of data assets and carrying 
out the modernisation of its procedures, as well as preparing 
for management by data and AI, especially regarding the 
development and safe maintenance of healthcare. Besides, 
it creates regulation frameworks that which ensure the 
affected people’s or the final users’ rights in the course 
of both the use of the data and the development of the 
technology, whilst they create transparency and security for 
the enforcement bodies. 
As global partners
AI is a global technology that rewrites methods of 
cooperation and international relations. 
Hungary cooperates and takes a role in the joint efforts 
as an active participant and positions itself in the duality 
of global competition and cooperation, and by building its 
digital sovereignty. To this end, it takes a role in the joint 
digital market development efforts of the European Union; 
it actively works on the establishment and introduction 
of a regulatory environment created in harmony with 
European, including Hungarian, values and interests, 
and it has bilateral relations with other countries in the 
course of economic and social collaboration. Moreover, 
it participates actively in the state and civil (not only 
consumer) interest representation organisation appearing 
in the global arena of economic force.
Assisting our daily lives
AI is a pragmatic technology with real effects. 
Hungary intends to introduce the application rapidly, 
deliberately, and by putting the theoretical concepts into 
practical purposes. To this end, it is defining and launching 
transformative programmes that have highlighted and 
ambitious aims, which define focused actions in the fields 
of self-driving vehicles, healthcare, agriculture, safe use 
of data, the use of renewable energy sources, customer 
service and education. All the programmes have major 
social effects, and they are initiatives affecting people’s 
everyday life, in which the impact of artificial intelligence 
serving people and enhancing the quality of their life can 
be experienced. 
Let’s use and develop artificial intelligence together,  
in a responsible manner, as a global partners  
to serve our daily routine. 
The starting point of the AI Strategy is the mindful and broad-based preparation for the changes caused by AI. The intended 
level of preparedness will improve the openness of the Hungarian labour market to innovation; the labour force, having 
the appropriate skills, will increase the added value produced by the Hungarian corporate sector, and the developing 
Hungarian corporate sector can thus increasingly contribute to the development of the whole national economy. In line 
with the structure of the interdependent system of national economic development, the Hungarian corporate sector will 
be able to produce more added value, as well as having a well-trained and agile labour force; the AI Strategy determines 
the following, high-level targets for 2030: 
3.2    Defined target indicators
I.
15% GDP increase induced by AI; 
and AI adoption exceeding the 
regional average
In comparison with GDP forecasts 
for 2030, the economic development 
caused by the increasing uptake of 
AI is 11.5% in our region, and 14% 
at a global level. However, Hungary 
set the target at 15%, thus aiming 
to exceed both the regional and the 
global level.
II.
26% average productivity growth 
in the Hungarian corporate sector 
compared to 2020 (the increase 
of gross added value per person 
employed)
According to forecasts, the produc -
tivity growth enabled by AI is between 
11 and 37% at a global level.21 
Hungary intends to achieve 26% 
pro ductivity growth with respect to 
Hungarian-owned domestic enter-
prises by 2030, thus supporting the 
objectives of the Hungarian SME 
Strategy in this field.
III.
1 million citizens perform new or 
higher value-added AI-supported 
work due to a change in position 
or workplace
An estimated 900,000 employees 
will be affected by AI and automation 
by the middle of the 2030s. The 
government of Hungary aims for 
even more employees to be able to 
perform work that has high added 
value and provides a better quality 
of life by 2030.
21 https://www.accenture.com/us-en/insight-artificial-intelligence-future-growth
1 million 
citizens perform 
higher value added 
work
15%
GDP increase
26%
average productivity 
growth32%
decrease
2,5 million
citizens
2 million
citizens
3 million
citizens
60% 
e-services
Hungary is 
first  
in testing
70%
smart technology
2120
Objectives by 2030 directly affecting citizens
Hungary is the main European centre for the 
development and testing of self-driving vehicles
2 million citizens take an active part in the 
management and use of their own data with the 
help of a data wallet
70% of the scheduling of renewable energy 
production is carried out by smart technologies
Due to the use of data-based systems, the emission 
of ammonia in agriculture decreases by 32% 
2.5 million citizens benefit from AI-supported 
education 
60% of administration is carried out electronically, in 
the form of self-service
AI integrates into the healthcare system, and 3 million citizens 
can benefit from AI-based modern services through the digital 
healthcare system 
The spread of applications based on artificial intelligence 
may be expected with regard to every branch, so artificial 
intelligence may impact all sectors in the future. Hence, 
government measures related to artificial intelligence 
may only be implemented effectively in the context of 
collaboration between sectors. 
The mid- and long-term objectives of each branch are 
defined by independent government strategies for the 
sectors. The measures and objectives of this strategy have 
been established by considering the sectoral strategies 
adopted (and those planned while this strategy was being 
drawn up) by the Government. In light of this, the main aim 
of the present strategy is to harmonise and at the same 
time increase the effectiveness of artificial intelligence-
related governmental measures affecting the sectors, thus 
contributing to the achievement of the objectives specified 
in separate sectoral strategies. The present strategy thus 
primarily supports the effective implementation of the 
sectoral strategies according to their designated targets.
3.3    The relationship between the AI Strategy and other government strategies
22 23
Se
ct
or
 s
pe
ci
fic
 fo
cu
s 
ar
ea
s
Fo
un
da
tio
n 
pi
lla
rs AI value Rules
Self-driving 
vehicles – 
autonomous 
systems
Health 
consciousness in a 
digital world
Climate-driven 
agriculture
Data wallet and 
personalized 
services
AI-supported 
development 
of personal 
competences
Automated 
administrative 
procedures in 
Hungarian 
Energy networks 
focused on 
renewable sources 
of energyTr
an
sf
or
m
at
iv
e 
pr
og
ra
m
m
es
Setting the data 
economy in 
motion
Education, 
competence 
development 
and societal 
preparedness
Research, 
development and 
innovation
Infrastructure 
development
Incentivising 
uptake
Regulatory 
and Ethical 
Framework
Based on the assessment of the domestic technological features, the Strategy makes proposals for numerous partly 
interdependent measures and intervention areas. The Strategy classifies these as follows:
The following figure outlines certain groups of measures of the Strategy and their relationship with each other.
4
What are we doing?
Foundation pillars required to 
prepare for the economic and 
social changes implied by AI
Ssectoral and technological focus 
areas, which are highly important 
considering the application and 
introduction of AI
Comprehensive transformative 
programmes affecting several 
sectors and having direct impacts 
on the citizens as well
The foundation pillars, which are grouped as the elements 
of the AI value chain and the frameworks of use of the 
technology, are shown in the bottom line of the above figure. 
The AI development objectives of the highlighted sec tors 
and technologies can be based on these foundation pil lars 
and are thus shown in the middle layer of the figure. The 
transformative programmes directly affecting society are 
in the upper segment of the figure, with arrows pointing up 
due to their expected effect. In the course of implementing 
the transformative programmes, we pay special attention 
to the resulting direct labour market processes and 
the management of transitions in cooperation with  the 
organisational units of the NES (National Employment 
Service).
Manufacturing
Healthcare
Agriculture
Public Administration
• Machine detection, machine recognition
• Intelligent manufacturing, logistics
• Language technology
• Reliable AI
• Anonymization
• Mathematical foundations of AI
• Logistics
• Transport
• Energy
Development of AI
Sectoral efficiency 
development
The so-called foundation pillars of the Strategy prepare society manage inevitable changes resulting from AI to effectively 
and to fully exploit the advantages of the technology.
Three of the foundation pillars are elements of the AI value chain, while three provide the framework for the operation of 
the value chain. The following figure shows the relation between the foundation pillars of the Strategy.
4.1    Foundation pillars
Re
se
ar
ch
 a
nd
 developmentRe
gu
la
to
ry
 and ethical framework
In
fr
ast
ru
cture development
Ed
uc
at
io
n,
 c
om
pe
te
nc
e 
development and societal preparedness
Incentivizing applications
Data economy
Focus areas
24 25
The measures related to the foundation pillars:
4.1.1    Mathematical foundations of AI
Making the collection of data and its secondary use and the management of data assets in 
both the private and the public sector conscious and regulated.
The basic elements of solutions using artificial intelligence are data processing and data analysis. That is why one of 
the main objectives of the Strategy is to provide the data, including private and state data, supporting the operation 
of such applications. It is significant that the measures defined here mainly serve to facilitate and encourage 
data processing while fully respecting the custodians’ rights laid down by the law, and the limits specified by 
the domestic and international legislation for the use and processing of the data, with special attention to the 
protection of personal data, including healthcare-related and other sensitive data. 
The aim is to make available the data underlying AI developments and the system of platforms and organisations 
providing the opportunity for secure and regulated sharing and secondary use of these data. 
Draft KPI: minimum 1,000 agreements concluded for the secondary use of data made available
The establishment of the opportunity for the 
use of private data based on market conditions 
(Data market)
The aim is to establish and raise awareness of the economic 
value of commercially viable data, and to encourage their 
secondary use to take advantage of their potential as a 
resource of the future
The instrument of this action is the introduction of a Data 
market platform (Adatpiac Platform) in three stages:
• In the first stage, a marketplace exercising brokerage 
function shall be established, which provides a space for 
the transmission of non-personal data and the related 
technologies. After that, the aim is to further develop a 
marketplace that is capable of more than the brokerage 
functions and can provide data storage as well as data 
quality based on standards and certificates. 
• In the second stage, we intend to create the commercial 
opportunities for the data assets including personal 
data, and to prepare the introduction of individuals as 
actors into the data market (linked to the development of 
a related mobile app).
• The third stage includes the creation of the “One 
Stop Shop” platform, which operates as a platform 
serving data custodians, as well as the researchers 
and developers of the application, with broad-based 
functionality, by integrating the data assets of the data 
markets and data spaces of the EU and by the active use 
of data spaces of the EU in the course of using Hungarian 
data.   
Making the public data available in line 
with EU legislation (Portal for public data 
»Közadatportál«)
The aim is to establish a complete and responsible national 
data management scheme, which includes sharing non-
personal data assets created in the public sector and 
having a significant multiplier effect in order to exploit 
the potential economic stimulation effect associated with 
their wide availability. An additional goal is the creation of 
an integrated public approach, which can help exploit the 
benefits of such economic growth in light of the investment 
needed to guarantee such open access to data. Based on 
this principle, different types of data shall be identified 
and either made freely available or funnelled into the Data 
market (see next section). 
The aim is standardised data generation and data format 
determination, which enable easy access to the data for 
research and development purposes to be possible and 
monitoring the use of public data at an organisational level.
• In order to connect public data into the data cycle, a 
new body, the National Data Asset Agency (Nemzeti 
Adatvagyon Ügynökség, hereinafter “NAVÜ”) shall be 
established, to coordinate and stimulate the strategic 
management of the data assets as the engine of utilising 
national data assets. It should be emphasised that NAVÜ 
will not perform independent data processing – this 
remains the task of the custodian organisation –, its aim 
is only to encourage and support data utilisation.
• For the sake of transparency, the establishment of a 
public data portal is required, which gives access to the 
data and provides a one-stop connection opportunity 
to access the national data assets freely – based on 
EU legislation – and, on the other hand, it makes the 
relationship between the state and businesses (G2B), the 
state and clients (G2C) and the states (G2G) possible.
Trading public data based on market conditions 
(relationship between the Data market and the 
Portal for public data) 
It is a key objective to ensure market-based trading in data 
having a significant multiplier effect and created in the 
public sector but not subject to Directive (EU) 2019/1024 on 
open data and the re-use of public sector information (PSI 
Directive) by connecting the Data market and the Public 
Data Portal. 
We aim at fully integrating the secondary use of the data 
created in the public administration into the data cycle and 
at establishing an effective model for the management of 
public data.
• We must identify those groups of data, the commercial 
use of which has already started or which may be 
involved in commerce, and NAVÜ and the Data Market 
can promote the effectiveness of their commerce.
26 27
4.1.2    Research, development and innovation  
– “Joint forces for development”
Building research synergies, placing the developers of the technology in an advantageous 
situation, celebrating technology-based innovators in order to cooperate in the technological 
research and development as an ecosystem based on domestic and European synergies.
The establishment of targeted, broad-based and dynamic AI research excellence embedded in an ecosystem.
Draft KPI: 15 instances of cooperation in international projects in the topic of technological research and 
development, of which at least two target a topic related to defence technologies, and five international AI patents
Development of machine detection
The development and customisation of machine detec-
tion in relevant fields is the cornerstone of major applied 
research, and embraces features such as merging 
sensor data from various imaging systems (camera, 
LIDAR, radar, etc.) and other sensors, de picting an 
unknown environment, pre-processing measured 
values, and improving their accuracy, as well as 
detecting and compensating for erroneous measure-
ments and distorted data. There are two critical areas 
to be observed: on the one hand, we wish to have a 
significant impact on the preservation of human health 
through medical imaging, and on the other, when 
applied in the manufacturing and agricultural sectors, 
we endeavour to achieve significant cost reductions. 
Development of intelligent manufacturing, logistics 
and IoT solutions based on machine learning
Due to the expansion of connected devices and the 
Internet of Things (IoT), an exponentially increasing 
amount of data is available with specific noise types and 
device-specific data formats. The methods of machine 
learning make it possible to learn the rules, functions, 
and decisions automatically and without human 
intervention or assistance. More accurate, reliable 
decisions require resource-intensive analysis of large 
amounts of data, and the design and implementation 
of complex optimisation and numeric procedures. The 
task is to examine the stability of a system containing 
a machine learning procedure, i.e. to probe whether 
the consideration of a new training point degrades 
the properties of the system. Their goals include the 
control of complex systems with a machine predictive 
control (MPC) algorithm, control signal, and providing 
guarantees for the stability of the controlled system.
Development of language technology
The interpretation of spoken and written texts is one of 
the fastest growing areas in the world. The application 
and further development of existing technologies 
to the Hungarian language is of significant national 
interest. One of the most important instruments for 
this is the development of Hungarian training corpuses 
both for written and spoken language, through which 
the understanding of Hungarian language, processed 
by open source software solutions, can be upgraded 
to the level of major languages. To this end, the aim 
is to support a community of researchers that can 
contribute to the survival of our language in a digital 
era by joining the corporate and academic efforts.
Developing a reliable AI
One of the barriers to the broad use of AI originates 
from the limitations of the current state of technology. 
In line with efforts made by the EU, we will focus 
on eliminating possible forms of error in AI, or 
making it transparent and predictable (developing 
test environments), making model decision-making 
mechanisms explicit, or developing hybrid models 
(interpretable decisions) and developing debugging 
Key directions for AI research and development
algorithms specialised in AI software that can help 
detect errors typically made by AI. Such development 
and integration of reliability into everyday technologies 
enables the technology to be used in critical decision-
making situations, as well as in situations where 
reliable human-machine collaboration is required. 
Development of data anonymization technologies
One of the most important resources of AI developments 
is the data. Only anonymous personal data shall be 
included in the teaching models, and shall be an object 
of trade and transferred to third parties. However, 
anonymous data can be decrypted using technological 
and inferential equipment, depending on the context 
of use. In order to ensure the secured data trade that 
takes user rights into full consideration and thus 
to ensure AI development, it is critical to define new 
technological and process developments that can 
guarantee the unambiguity of personal data.
Development of the mathematical foundations of AI
Machine learning and deep learning, the branches of 
artificial intelligence currently gaining the greatest 
attention, are based on high-level mathematics, in 
which, combined with data and computational capacity, 
we saw a major breakthrough in the early 2010s. 
However, at the same time, we have incomplete know-
ledge of the mathematical foundations and limitations of 
the method. Certain mathematical theories re searched 
by domestic researchers with world-class excellence 
and based on linear dimensionality reduc tion, the 
regularity lemma and graph limit theory promise a 
breakthrough. The question is, how these theories can 
be used for, inter alia, artificial neurons, the key mani-
festations regarding AI research. Another impor tant 
topic is the theory of deep learning and machine learning 
optimisation methods based on topological multiplicity.
Encouragement of basic and applied research in 
key tech nological areas, such as machine vision, 
language inter pretation and data anonymization, 
as well as in fields related to branches of industry, 
or defence technologies, and the presentation of 
key international research results in targeted 
technological and sectoral areas
The resources and opportunities of Hungary are limited, 
compared to the continuously expanding opportunities 
of research and development, so only the harmonised 
expenditure and use of the existing R&D resources may 
result in significant domestic AI development.
The aim is to present research results of international 
importance in key technological (see box above) and 
industrial fields (healthcare, manufacturing, agriculture, 
public administration) and also related to defence tech-
nologies, by creating a research ecosystem organised 
through industry-led networking that can focus on research 
areas in order to respond to industrial needs. 
To this end, a National Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 
(Mesterséges Intelligencia Nemzeti Laboratórium) shall 
be established, which will act as a coordinating body 
between each of the basic and applied research institutes, 
the market, the AI research scene and the international 
research community.
• International research centres could be solicited to move 
to Hungary as an auxiliary measure and the coordinated 
worldwide communication of the established Hungarian 
research initiatives and results, as well as building up 
a sound academic partnership framework could also be 
good leverage.
• In addition to technologies of civil and dual-use, the focus 
area of the National Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 
will also be open to basic and applied research related 
to defence technologies – according to the needs of the 
Ministry of Defence – by joining the relevant international 
research networks and the available European (EDF 
Programme) tenders for defence technologies.
Encouragement of industry-led networking in AI 
research
The aim is to establish collaboration between the re-
searchers of artificial intelligence and the users of the 
technology (industry, public administration, healthcare, 
etc.). When applying the industry-led networking coor-
dinated by the emerging National Artificial Intelligence 
Laboratory, the goal of the academic sector will be fulfilled, 
in other words there will be a unified coordination of basic 
and applied domestic research, as well as the goal of the 
user community, according to which development is also 
of significant importance. It is of key importance for the 
latter that the effects of AI are perceived not only in the 
technological developments but in the innovations of the 
models of products and business as well.
28 29
• The academic AI competence map will be created
• Implementation of collaborative projects
• Resources shall be assigned to the jointly financed 
research
Incubation of start-up companies
The goal is to support the establishment of companies 
that are able to develop and bring to market more new, 
even globally scalable, products. The application of proven 
technologies to specific cases and their sector-specific 
intro duction are particularly important.
• Provision of the open data assets supporting the 
development
• Creating a network of “Early adopter” partners
• Development of AI-specific accelerators
• Development of AI-specific investment funds
• Sector-specific grants
Provide a window of opportunity for companies 
developing custom applications
The goal is to ensure that companies developing the appli-
cations receive an increasing amount of orders reflecting 
the pace of general adoption in the economy, which is one 
of the most important objectives of the strategy.
• Supporting a spirit of experimentation
• Establishment of AI marketplaces
• Announcement of AI innovation awards
• Cooperation in academic research projects
Attracting research centres of international 
organisations to move to Hungary
The goal is to relocate as many research centres using AI 
technology as possible to Hungary, based on our strengths 
such as the regulatory environment, good quality research, 
and the ecosystem, or to ensure that newly established 
research centres shall be based in Hungary.
• Clear positioning of Hungary in AI
• Establishment of tax incentives
• Foundations for the clear frameworks of the academic 
partnerships
4.1.3    Incentivising uptake  
 – “Widespread use”
Encouraging and supporting purposeful and tailor-made experimentation to gradually 
integrate already available and proven technologies.
Establishment of an integrated innovation value chain with strong market collaboration.
Draft KPI: 200 projects reaching the Proof of Concept, and introduction of 1,000 registered and commercialised 
AI applications
Extensive support for experimentation
The goal is to increase AI-related experimentation to imple-
ment an increasing amount of “risky” AI development, as 
well as to cooperate with the professional organisations 
of industry in favour of the industry-specific transfer of 
knowledge to the participants in the AI ecosystem.
• Strengthening the organisational culture of experi men-
ta tion, provision of a market and brokerage function for 
the participants in the ecosystem in order to find the 
right partners early by creating marketplaces. 
• Provision of consultants and AI trainers for companies 
to support the organisational learning process related to 
the introduction of the application.
• Foundation of an AI Experience Centre (MI Élmény köz-
pont) and working with existing experience centres to 
provide a physical and virtual space for experimentation. 
• Establishment of special funding opportunities until the 
“proof of concept” development phase to reduce the cost 
of experimentation and the risk involved.  
Development of corporate advisory services 
based on artificial intelligence (chatbots)
Using the opportunities provided by AI in our existing digital 
economic development measures, supporting access to 
them, especially in the EDIOP 3.2.1-15 Modern Businesses 
Programme (MBP) led by the Hungarian Chamber of Com-
mer ce and Industry (MKIK). Within the framework of MBP, 
by completing its content and frameworks by the end of 
2021. Developing such corporate advisory services based 
on artificial intelligence (chatbots) that are capable of 
increasing the scope of the digitally advanced enterprise 
or enterprises intending to become digitally advanced, 
along with supporting enterprises already involved. The 
development can be integrated with the government’s 
planned voice-based artificial intelligence platform.
Promotion of the application of AI by SMEs
Based on the existing networks for SME development, the 
goal is to encourage SMEs playing a central role in the 
Hungarian economy to apply AI. 
• Development of the content in the interests of making 
indispensable information and training available to this 
special target group.
• Provision of AI trainers with the aim of consultation on 
the methods of AI application.
• Composition of a prepared package of applications 
(toolkit) to support the application of AI technology.
• Establishment of opportunities for SMEs to learn from 
each other, and provision of resources to support SME-
specific introduction.
30 31
4.1.4   Education, competence development and societal preparedness  
– “Focusing on human competencies”
We enable our present and future societies to seize opportunities and, if necessary, put their 
development on a new path. 
Preparation of the actors in society and the economy to leverage the opportunities offered by AI and manage the 
associated risks, utilising the instruments of education and training. 
In the course of developing these capabilities, the currently available and potentially expected competences of 
the market shall be taken into account; therefore, the availability of situational assessments and forecasts of 
the labour market are required. For this reason, a continuous collaboration is needed between the professional 
workshops, economic sectors and NES involved in the development.
Draft KPI: 300 people with PhD degree involved in an AI research topic or methodology; 8,000 people received 
adult education (mainly for target groups in manufacturing, healthcare, agriculture, transport and logistics, as 
well as civil servants and SME leaders)
Making knowledge of AI technologies available 
to the broader society
The goal is to raise the broader society’s awareness of AI, 
to introduce and realise the advantages, disadvantages 
and risks of AI technologies, which are prerequisites for 
adopting the technology. In order to support AI uptake, it is 
necessary to raise awareness of the existence of the new 
technology and the main features of its operation, as well 
as to strengthen the “early adopter” attitude.
The use of AI technology without critical thinking may hold 
potential dangers; the proposals of an opaque algorithm 
that works as a “black box” must always be considered by 
the individual users. In order to enable responsible and safe 
use, it is extremely important to prepare young people for 
the specific dangers of AI technology, as well as to develop 
critical thinking. Another key goal is to prepare parents and 
teachers for the appropriate protection of children.
This shall be done in cooperation with the formal and non-
formal education system and professional organisations. 
Related action plans:
• Establishment of an AI Innovation Hub (MI Innová ciós 
Központ) for dissemination, information, event orga-
nisation and social dialogue, the collection of profession- 
specific new training needs and their communication to 
the education system
• Completion of the AI Challenge in Hungary by the end of 
2021: – Awareness raising for 1 million people, training 
100,000 people by completing a basic AI course, definition 
of the goals of the awareness period starting from 2022 
based on the experience of the AI Challenge
• Programmes available within the framework of public 
education and vocational training to support students in 
becoming users of AI technologies (horizontal and mo-
du lar AI contents in training, collaboration with ro bots, 
“kisokos” guides, student competitions, career orien ta-
tion tenders)
• Preparation of teachers in public education and in-
struc tors in vocational training, organisation of further 
education programmes, awards for teachers taking the 
lead in the use of AI, experimentation and preparation
• Development of AI-related general knowledge, skills and 
competencies in higher education among the students, 
higher education staff and local economic/social actors.
• Intensive use of AI technologies in the developments 
associated with data management in higher education. 
• Preparation for AI related tasks in public education and 
vocational training in the context of teacher training and 
higher education in general
Competence development and expansion of the 
expert base required for the uptake of AI 
The goal is to reduce the shortage of specialists on the basis 
of potential customers of AI developments, i.e. to expand 
the circle of managers who are aware of the technology, 
and are able to assess the needs of the enterprise, identify 
potential uses for AI technologies and manage and support 
implementation processes. Related action plans:
• Start of ECDL type training introducing AI technologies
• Establishment of preparation programmes for the AI 
application:
• for the managers of SMEs,
• for experts in manufacturing, agriculture, healthcare, 
transport, logistics, energetics and public 
administration,
• Creation of demand through the recommendation of 
content, provision of grants for targeted corporate re-
training, recommendation of training courses
• Development of data asset management training for 
those working in public administration
Enhancing data specialist, developer and 
research expert capacity
Another goal is to enhance the data specialist, developer, 
and research expert capacity necessary for the domestic 
expansion of AI, and to reduce the current shortage of 
labour in these fields. Introduction of a professional visa for 
experts in the field of AI for the purpose of preventing or 
reducing such a labour shortage in Hungary.
Supervision and development of the content of under-
graduate and master’s degree programmes in the field 
of information technology to ensure the expert capacity 
required for AI developments. 
• Introduction and dissemination of the application of AI 
technologies in research methodology. Promoting and 
supporting the use of AI technologies in the preparation 
of research methodologies for doctoral courses.
• Increasing the number of AI-related topics of fundamental 
research and doctoral dissertations in several branches 
of science, collecting the AI-related doctoral courses 
and making them available to PhD students, organising 
cross-teaching programmes independent from the 
programme, as well as establishing PhD programmes 
based on collaboration in the topic of AI.
• Establishing an AI scholarship for doctoral instructors 
and researchers or expanding the existing higher 
education / research scholarships with the topic 
of AI, and providing networking support for fellow 
researchers
• Promoting cooperation between instructors, researchers 
and institutions (higher education institutions, research 
institutes, etc.) in fields related to AI, networking, creating 
a motivation system for supervisors / mentors, funnelling 
foreign lecturers and researchers into domestic scientific 
life
• Attracting doctoral students, instructors, researchers, 
developers and entrepreneurs working in the field of AI 
to Hungary; formulating the necessary means for this, 
thereby growing the available highly qualified workforce.
Inclusion and talent coaching for groups at risk 
of falling behind in the labour market 
The aim is to collect, promote and make available Hun-
garian language versions of personalised learning support 
products available internationally for people at risk of 
falling behind (disabled, elderly, digital illiterates, those 
with a low level of education), using AI technologies, as well 
as to identify and provide priority development and support 
for talented people from an early age.
• International collection and Hungarian translation of 
guidance material prepared for the groups at risk of 
falling behind in the labour market.
• Continuous dialogue on the development results and 
the special demands that may be formulated as the 
development goals.
• Introducing games for improving high-level mathematical 
and logical skills from an early age and identifying 
talented children and teenagers.
• Provision of mentors and tutors; online and in-person 
training for recognised talents and providing support for 
them beyond the school system.
32 33
Tasks for the education system, with an 
emphasis on higher education
The above goals must be achieved in the formal education 
system (public education, vocational training, higher edu-
cation, adult education) and in non-formal and informal 
learning, drawing on the considerable synergies existing 
between them. 
Personal competence development with AI support is one of 
the elements of the transformative programmes included 
in this strategy, in which the education system, particularly 
higher education, is expected to play a considerable role. 
The tasks of education, specifically, higher education, in the 
foundation pillar “Education, competence development and 
societal preparedness” and the transformative programme 
“Personal competence development with AI support” are 
presented together in the table below.
Goal \ Relevant subsystem Education system (formal education) Other sector  
(non-formal and informal training)
Making knowledge of AI 
technologies available to the 
wider society
• Awareness-raising in public education 
• Awareness-raising in vocational education
• Awareness-raising in higher education (a mandatory 
introductory course for all)
• preparation by higher education of teachers in public education 
and instructors in VET for the new AI awareness tasks
• rewards for teachers and vocational instructors
• awareness-raising, dissemination, social 
communication, organised events
• online AI training
• Reaching out to 1 million people through 
the AI Challenge,
• rewards for teachers and vocational 
instructors
Competence development 
and expansion of the expert 
base required for the uptake 
of AI 
• preparation of public administration staff for application by 
higher education (National University of Public Service, NKE)
• ECDL type AI training
• preparation of SME managers and experts 
of high priority sectors for application
• operation of a training marketplace
Enhancing data specialist, 
developer and research 
expert capacity
• development of basic training programmes in higher education, 
master’s degree programmes and doctoral programmes, 
including PhD AI training programmes based on collaborative 
learning, also making use of online training possibilities,
• introducing and promoting the use of AI in higher education in 
the field of research methodology (training the trainers)
• rendering AI-related doctoral courses interoperable in higher 
education
• creating doctoral scholarships in higher education for 
students of research and development, or enhancing existing 
scholarships in this regard
• developing an incentive system in higher education for PhD 
supervisors, networking across doctoral schools
• making efforts in higher education to involve international 
instructors and researchers more closely in scientific life in 
Hungary
• introduction of a professional visa system 
(MoI) for, and to enable researchers, 
developers and entrepreneurs with AI 
expertise to settle in Hungary
Inclusion and talent coaching 
for groups at risk of falling 
behind in the labour market
• translation of AI tools into Hungarian for 
vulnerable social groups
• coordination with the group concerned 
regarding their needs, with the 
involvement of the Innovation Centre
• development of games to attract talented 
individuals
• mentoring, talent promotion for individuals 
identified as having special talents
Transformative Programmes 
for personal competence 
development with AI support
• development of the VET and adult education registry with the 
aim of developing a training recommendation service aligned to 
individuals’ goals in life
• development of AI-based services to provide assistance in 
individuals’ progress in their studies in higher education, to 
facilitate enrolment in courses and provide support for online 
forms of adaptive learning 
• development of apps to provide 
personalised training recommendations 
and to motivate users to take up/continue 
with studies, based on the results of the 
combination of administrative data from 
public education, higher education and 
adult education
• development of personal learning 
assistant, primarily in acquiring basic 
competences, primarily for social groups 
facing risks of falling behind in the labour 
market
4.1.5    Infrastructure development  
– “Stable and Accessible Infrastructure”
Creating the digital infrastructure of the future as a suitable basis for efforts in research and 
development.
AI research and development requires the development and maintenance of a single harmonised national 
infrastructure that enables cooperation between participants, structured in such a way that it promotes and 
facilitates its operation in the regulatory and ethical framework put in place through AI developments.
Identification of resources needed for AI 
development; exploration of existing resources; 
assessment and development of necessary 
capacities
The aims include providing a central infrastructure for the 
resources required for carrying out research and general 
development tasks, along with continuous development, as 
required, and maintenance in the long term, of the resulting 
infrastructure. 
• Providing businesses and institutions with whatever 
hardware resources they require for their research and 
development activities, such as specific purpose-built 
hardware, supercomputers, cloud-based software and/
or service systems.
• Centralised collection of national digital data files, data 
collections, data repositories and data silos etc., making 
data assets of relevance to AI research and development 
available and suitable for research and utilisation.
• Providing access to software designed for developing and 
testing open-access and paid-for AI-related applications. 
These include, for instance, plugins and software libra-
ries containing ready-made solution components and 
programmed algorithms for certain facets of AI deve-
lopment.
• Sandbox services; development of highly protected 
virtual environments for AI-related projects, along with 
AI testing centres; test environments (testbeds) for 
standardised tests.
Creation of coordinating measures to enable 
the efficient use of resources for the various 
user groups of the AI ecosystem
The aim is to meet research institutes’ and users’ AI-related 
temporary storage and computing capacity requirements 
in a coordinated way without state-owned participants 
developing redundant capacity. Setting up and applying 
quality standards to both users and resources so that the 
parties involved in cooperation can be assured that the 
resources they use are in place to promote the achievement 
of the goals being pursued and that those sharing 
resources can be assured of the use of their resources in 
accordance with qualified standards and ethical norms. 
Suitable standards need to be developed and applied to 
make sure that the coordinative tools to be developed will 
enable the relevant domestic systems to join with those in 
place in the EU and make it possible to open the domestic 
infrastructure and make use of European resources, 
thereby facilitating Hungary’s effective participation in AI 
research and development projects in the EU (Digital Single 
Market).  
• Development of marketplaces to manage  resources at 
meta-level, promote brokerage activities, offer available 
resources and indicate resource requirements.
• Development of hybrid cloud services for research and 
development, providing access to a variety of computing 
capacities and developer applications through a single 
integrated interface.
• Building an automated access control function to 
ope rate the marketplaces, allocate access rights to 
resources appearing in the marketplaces, connecting 
infra structure-type resources through APIs and enabling 
automated accounting of the resources used. 
34 35
4.1.6    Regulatory and Ethical Framework  
– “Reliable, regulated use”
Creation of an effective, efficient, human centered and supportive domestic regu la tory 
environment for the operation of AI, together with the necessary ethical framework; taking 
the relevant EU legislation into account.
Establishing a regulatory and oversight framework to ensure responsible, reliable and 
human-centred utilisation of the technology’s potentials.
Creation of an effective, efficient and supportive domestic regulatory environment for the operation of AI, together 
with the necessary ethical framework; taking the relevant EU legislation into account.
Creating a regulatory framework for data 
assets
A general regulatory environment needs to be put in place 
for data assets with functions such as supporting the AI-
related use of public data assets and facilitating the process 
of turning data into assets (assetization), together with the 
development of the relevant financial and legal regulations 
– taking into account the various sectors’ specificities 
and responsibilities in terms of data processing, as well 
as the relevant fundamental rights and the international 
framework of data regulations.
• Creation of a framework law on data assets.
• Introduction of a sector-specific regulatory environment 
to enable data to be turned into assets and their use for 
purposes of AI.
• Developing rules to govern the use of public data, along 
with a concept for and rules on their assetization.
Developing an AI regulatory environment 
(comprising rules on registration, technological 
entities, responsibility/liability and industry 
regulations)
The aim is to explore legal constraints on and the regulatory 
needs of AI development and to make proposals regarding 
changes to be made to the general regulatory environment, 
along with improvements to the sector-specific regulatory 
environment in order to facilitate AI development.  
• Continuous monitoring and mediation of the relevant 
EU rules and other regulations (including developments 
in legal practice and jurisprudence), participation in the 
preparation of legal regulations and quick and effective 
communication of new rules and interpretations to the 
Hungarian legal system. 
• Development of AI registers and laying down 
requirements to be applied in the most important areas.
• Separation of responsibilities and provision of 
continuous support for rules and developments.
• Support for the implementation of the AI strategy in 
terms of statutory rules and ethics.
Creating an ethics framework for the AI 
industry
The aim is to create a Code of Ethics, taking international 
standards and domestic specificities into account, based on 
broad consensus and factoring in the work and output of the 
European Commission, as well as the Ad hoc Committee on 
Artificial Intelligence of the Council of Europe (CAHAI).  
• The development of the required ethics framework 
will involve specifying what is meant by the term 
human-centred, identifying ethical AI objectives and 
development directions and integrating these in a 
reliable and robust AI framework, as well as developing 
techniques for asserting and enforcing the rules of 
ethics. 
• Developing an AI Code of Ethics.
Creating an Artificial Intelligence Regulation 
and Ethics Knowledge Centre (hereinafter 
“MISZET”)
The aim is to create and coordinate an extensive pool of 
experts to help resolve legal issues and matters of ethics 
relating to the regulation of artificial intelligence and the 
implementation of the strategy.
 
Identification of sector specific development goals in order for Hungary to occupy an increasingly 
knowledge-intensive position in the global value chain.
Based on Hungary’s economic structure and its strengths and opportunities in digital and industry-specific competitiveness, 
a number of high priority sectors have been identified, in which concerted efforts shall be made, focusing on the development 
of AI and on disseminating applications. The focus areas identified, the objectives to be pursued and the tools to be used 
have been determined with the active participation of experts from the sectors concerned.
4.2    Sector-specific focus areas
4.2.1    Manufacturing and autonomous systems  
– “Smart, personalised, environmentally conscious manufacturing”
AI process-driven smart manufacturing by small, medium-sized and large enterprises, based on new business 
models, catering to individual requirements, with environmentally conscious manufacturing technologies.
Optimising existing processes
Processes need to be optimised and their operational 
efficiency needs to be improved with the help of AI; moreover, 
manufacturing model projects need to be implemented, 
with a focus on quality, inventory management, workforce, 
energy and resources used, as well as the availability of 
tools and equipment. 
Prioritised functions in the short term: regulating the 
parameters of production processes, support for on-site 
decisions; quality control with AI tools, online product 
testing; layout and process simulation, factory optimisation; 
predictive maintenance; high-precision indoor and outdoor 
positioning systems using 5G and AI technology; robotic 
control support using AI solutions; different applications 
of artificial vision in manufacturing; creating an open IT 
architecture for production; manufacturing in the city.
Prioritised functions in the medium term: Use of AI in 
6G networks and in manufacturing; after-sales product 
tracking, AI-based data processing, estimating and 
indication of servicing requirements; drone management in 
industrial applications (model factory, model area); critical 
machine to machine (M2M) communication, automated 
management of the operation of multiple IoT devices 
and private communication devices in industry (model 
area); supplier chains, product tracking; optimisation of 
manufacturing logistics; optimisation of energy manage-
ment; cybersecurity in manufacturing.
Organizing an innovation ecosystem; 
introducing new business models
Basic and applied research projects need to be organised 
and aligned to industry requirements centrally, and an 
innovation ecosystem also needs to be organised (by the 
National AI Laboratory, currently being established) in 
order to improve efficiencies and launch new processes 
in manufacturing. Introduction of an AI maturity model 
and its measurement across the entire range of 
production. Growth exceeding that enabled by the organic 
development of operational efficiency can only be achieved 
by comprehensively redesigning manufacturing or by 
constructing a new business model at the manufacturing 
company concerned. 
SME transformation projects
Projects facilitating transition in parallel with earlier 
goals need to be implemented for the SME sector – a key 
component of the Hungarian economy – if manufacturing 
SMEs are also to remain competitive.
36 37
Structuring of, providing access to, and 
developing the existing data assets, improving 
the supply of data
The Agricultural Data Framework can be implemented 
by creating a cloud-based data information platform, 
making it possible to cover all agricultural producers, one 
that is capable of recording data from multiple sources, 
storing them in a farm-based and structured way, making 
them accessible based on authorisations received from 
producers (data wallet service). It should also be capable 
of recording (farm or plant based) producer data as well as 
government data (for example, from the National Tax and 
Customs Administration, the National Meteorology Service, 
the National Food Chain Safety Office, the Hungarian State 
Treasury, the Land Parcel Identification System) in a frame-
work, as well as processing and storing them in a coor-
dinated and structured way (e.g. AI).
Enhancing the agricultural research and 
development base and the innovation 
ecosystem
Launching the Digital Agricultural Innovation Centre 
(Hungarian acronym: DAIK) to promote the development 
of the digital innovation ecosystem and incubate start-ups 
using AI technologies, along with the Digital Food Chain 
Research, Development and Innovation Centre in coope-
ration with agricultural higher education. 
Provision of testing environments
This involves the development of a testing environment 
for the innovation and testing of robots with the help of AI 
technologies (e.g. the Mezőhegyesi Ménesbirtok stud farm).
Automation and the introduction and spread of 
AI applications
Existing regulations need to be amended and new 
regulations need to be introduced regarding the use of 
drones and autonomous machines, and a Digital Agri-
cultural Academy needs to be established to promote the 
pro per use of and encourage the proper application of pre-
cision and autonomous machines.
Development of AI-based services
Crop yield estimation functions and a crop protection fore-
cast service need to be developed, and a National Food 
Chain Data Supply Centre has to be established.
4.2.2    Data-driven healthcare  
– “More accurate diagnostics, more effective treatment”
The aims are to achieve, in agreement and cooperation with all stakeholders, the responsible use of the con-
tinuously expanding health data assets available in Hungary, to strengthen the diagnostic and curative use of 
artificial intelligence, to develop and introduce AI-supported medical decision-making and medical devices, and 
to contribute thereby to an effectively and efficiently operating healthcare sector in accordance with the e-Health 
strategy.
Making available the existing health data assets 
and supporting AI research and innovation 
using such data assets
The extensive and continuously generated health data 
assets need to be made available through an up-to-date 
infrastructure and then utilised with the help of AI, always 
in observance of the requirements laid down in the GDPR. 
Another objective is to introduce targeted preventive, 
scree ning and decision-making applications drawing on 
the accumulated data assets. This in turn requires the 
development of an infrastructure and organisation to sup-
port the use of the available health data assets.
Medical AI application development, testing and 
piloting; spreading of successful applications 
supported with data
Spreading of AI-based solutions in medicine and in day-to-
day healthcare processes. This may be achieved inter alia by 
spreading existing successful AI applications, as confirmed 
by data, for use on a pilot basis. 
Improving the efficiency of health 
administration and management using AI tools
Support for research with a focus on AI in the context of 
the National Health Laboratory, incubation of health start-
ups and promotion of AI use in capacity planning and 
administration (e.g. HR, ambulance service, asset utilisation
4.2.3    Integrated, digital agriculture  
– “Innovative, data-driven, AI-supported agricultural management”  
Implementing and spreading AI developments in support of and coordinated with the digital renewal of the 
agricultural sector.
38 39
4.2.4    Public Administration  
– “Data-driven, service provider state”
The aim is to facilitate electronic access to, and the digitalisation of, public services, with AI being one of the 
enabling technologies. These developments fit in with the electronic public administration concept and system, 
a function already working on integration and developing processes, the efficiency of which can be improved and 
where new channels can be provided with services more effectively. The basic principles applying to electronic 
administration must be followed in such developments as well, i.e. the aims are to develop and test platform-type 
solutions that can be recommended to all public bodies, and to promote the use of such solutions.  
Creating a research cluster focusing on the use 
of AI applications by public bodies and the central 
supply
Automating public administration processes by 
means of AI 
• Development of chat-based digital one-stop-shop admi-
nistrative processes.
• Automation of correspondence, chat and telephone 
commu nication between administration and customers.
• Increasing the number of self-service transactions 
through process administration.
• Continued development of the Central Identification 
Agent (KAÜ).
• Development of administrative formalities through 
KIOSK terminals and physical robots at specific customer 
service units.
• Development of automated functions for the adoption of 
decisions.
• Facilitating online labour market and competency-based 
workforce agency processes.
Introduction of control systems for use by law 
enforcement
• Continued development of the Robocop programme.
• Development of border protection control systems, along 
with a comprehensive identification system.
• Criminal prosecution and crime prevention relying on 
integrated data-based analyses.
• Introduction of existing AI technologies in criminal inves-
tigation processes.
Development of complex modelling systems to 
simulate decision-making situations
• Development of simulations required for modelling 
comp lex decision-making situations and introduction of 
instruments enabling rapid response capabilities for the 
Disaster Management Authority, the Hungarian Defence 
Forces and law enforcement bodies.
Applications and developments for the Defence 
Forces
• Automation of the processing, and synthesising into in-
for mation, of big data and information operations, as 
well as decision preparing and supporting systems. 
• Implementation and development of predictive supply 
sys tems. 
• Development of autonomous systems in all relevant theat-
res of operations (air, land, space, cyberspace). Develop-
ment of each side of human-machine cooperation. 
• Protection against AI-supported systems in all relevant 
theatres of operation. Modelling and simulation. 
• Developments aimed at protecting and analysing the 
defence-related elements of National Data Assets.
Development of AI capabilities for military and 
national security purposes
• Development of basic infrastructure for developing and 
running programmes, 
• Development and introduction of AI-based data collecting 
and processing systems to accelerate the processes 
whereby decisions are prepared, and 
• AI-based support for the cyberspace used for military 
purposes.
Development of systems supporting the over-
sight of financial and taxation processes
• Improving the efficiency of the processes employed by the 
State Audit Office, the National Tax and Customs Admi-
nistration and the banking supervisory authorities by pre-
screening items to be investigated and by intro ducing 
process automation (software robots, language processing).
Development of predictive maintenance processes
• Introduction of predictive maintenance processes, de velop-
ment of the maintenance of real property and movable property 
elements in public ownership through the development of 
data-based failure projections and introducing maintenance 
processes based on such projections.
4.2.5    Energy – “Data-based, personalised energy supply”
4.2.6 Logistics – “Supply Chain integrated through AI applications”
Making use of data assets in the energy sector, development of services that can be personalised as a result. 
Introduction of AI dissemination and education with a comprehensive logistics focus, building up logistics data 
assets and integrated development of logistics AI applications overarching the entire supply chain.
• Integration of smart meters, development of conditions 
and requisites for data-driven processes.
• Introduction of smart heating cost sharing for 
apartments using central or district heating services.
• Smart grid development (development of data-driven 
energy market models).
• Predictive maintenance, autonomous operation.
• Development of smart energy supply and optimisation 
systems, specifically designed for the various industries.
• Extending various training systems and topics with the 
involvement of professional organisations, cooperation 
with VET and higher education institutions, enhancing 
the acceptance of AI.
• Exploring data assets of relevance to logistics that can 
be extracted from data supplied by central and local 
government bodies.
• Development, with the involvement of professional 
organisations, of a register of AI applications used in 
supply chains and promoting the spread of AI solutions 
on a large scale across the entire supply chain.
• Starting a process to harmonise the identification of 
products and goods, launching a standardisation process.
• Integrated development of the interfacing areas through 
the supply chain/logistics (e.g. supply of consumers, 
manufacturing systems, predictive maintenance).
• Developing AI-based services to optimise logistics.
40 41
4.2.7    Transport – “Development of real-time management with AI support”
Hungary should become a motor of and international proving ground for the use of AI in the transportation industry. 
Taking Smart City concepts further – traffic 
management
Introduction of image-based traffic control technologies 
and related camera systems in large cities across Hungary. 
Introduction of real-time traffic management based on the 
processed information. What with the continuous growth of 
the global population, the number of cities and the ratio of 
the urban population, AI-supported urban development can 
facilitate a shift to a (more) sustainable social and economic 
system.
Development of digital infrastructure based on 
on-board data transmitters
Installation of sensors on the relevant elements of the 
transport network along motorways as required for DSRC 
(WiFi) based data transmission between vehicles and the 
infrastructure communicating through the 5G mobile 
network.
Public transport developments
Introduction of optimised fleet management solutions to 
enable the services to be run according to the schedules 
in place, based on real-time traffic data. Introducing a 
real-time vehicle tracking solution for users through an 
application interface dynamically predicting the expected 
arrival time based on traffic monitoring.
Mobilising goals of outstanding social utility, with direct benefits for all citizens. 
Hungary is committed to introducing AI in as a wide a field of applications as possible; therefore, in addition to identifying the 
frameworks, foundations and sectoral focus areas required for introduction, it also specifies challenging comprehensive 
development programmes that will generate value for individual citizens through the use of AI technologies. The 
implementation of these – known as transformative – programmes are aimed at profoundly transforming the sectors 
concerned, as well as promoting the use of AI by society in general. In the course of implementing the transformative 
programmes, special attention shall be paid to the related direct processes of the labour market and the management of 
transitions with the cooperation of the organisational units of the NES (National Employment Service).
4.3    Transformative programmes
4.3.1    Self-driving vehicles – autonomous systems
4.3.2    Health consciousness in a digital world  
Developing, regulating and widely spreading autonomous systems, with a special focus on the 
introduction of autonomous vehicles for society.
Preparing citizens to accept the benefits of digital health preservation schemes and the use of 
AI-supported proposals, and help them steer around possible dangers. 
The aim is to develop a supportive environment through 
developing regulations, R&D&I and infrastructures to-
gether, to enable combined development of the various 
disciplines of a self-driving ecosystem. Further goals 
include the development and operation of the most efficient 
transport system possible – by means of automation, 
machine learning and artificial intelligence, along with 
the development of an operating environment for the self-
driving ecosystem in response to global technological and 
user trends. Developed autonomous vehicle solutions 
can also serve as a basis for the development of defence 
solutions.
Digitalisation and artificial intelligence present many new 
opportunities and possibilities in digital health awareness 
and medicine. Hungary has outstanding achievements in 
the integration and analysis of patient records, which we 
continue to improve by developments in the process of 
elaborating industry focuses. This creates an increasingly 
wide range of opportunities for supporting doctors and the 
healthcare sector as a whole and for the development and 
take-up of artificial intelligence applications. 
It is also paramount that citizens become aware of the 
potential of such possible application methods and make 
active efforts to preserve or restore their own health. 
Digitalisation and artificial intelligence offer an ever-in-
creasing range of tools and opportunities for people in this 
regard; recommending and using these under adequate 
supervision is in the interest of Hungary and its citizens alike. 
The aim is to improve digital health consciousness in 
Hungary – in line with the e-Health strategy and under the 
leadership of the health sector’s participants – whereby 
citizens make use of the services that are already available 
(e-Health Care Cloud Hosting /hereinafter “EESZT”/, patient 
information) and make active contributions by integrating 
the data collected regarding themselves, by taking care of 
data quality (using smart devices, logging their own data) 
and by using the services available through the analysis of 
data. 
42 43
4.3.3    Climate-driven agriculture 
The goal is to mitigate the effects of climate change, reduce harmful emissions and at the 
same time increase farmers’ income with the help of data-based AI solutions.
Agriculture is more dramatically affected by climate change 
than other domestic sectors and regions (in terms of both 
exposure and contribution). The most important direct 
consequences include extreme weather conditions, quality 
issues and new types of health risks for plant life, while the 
most relevant indirect ones include the volatility of global 
market prices and thus fluctuation in farmers’ incomes. 
Keeping the environment in a sustainable condition is 
crucial for agriculture, as this is the most important factor 
of production in the future. AI can facilitate preparations for 
and help mitigate the adverse impacts of climate change 
– perhaps even make it possible to reverse some of the 
processes concerned.
In terms of mitigating/reversing some of the adverse 
effects of climate change, the agricultural sector is 
especially profoundly affected by harmful emissions in 
livestock production (e.g. the ecological footprint of farm 
animals), plant production (e.g. use of fertilisers) and 
forestry (e.g. choice of timber species) alike. Hungary 
must adapt to international regulations; its agricultural 
ammonia emissions must be reduced by a total of 32% 
by 2030 in accordance with the relevant EU directives. AI-
based optimising solutions relating to plant and livestock 
production can help to reduce the relevant ecological 
footprint together with agriculture’s harmful emissions. 
Moreover, the programme is also aimed at contributing to 
the achievement of the target figures of additional climate 
and energy policy documents (National Energy Strategy, 
National Energy and Climate Plan, 1st Climate Action Plan).
In preparation for the negative impacts of climate change, 
various predictive AI-based analytical methods need to be 
applied as part of the measures to be taken for protection 
against the key types of damage – drought, hail, spring frost 
– and the deterioration of water and air quality. The risks 
faced by livestock production include an up to 10% decrease 
in milk production and a 15-50% drop in fertilisation 
rates during hot periods. The timing of both seeding and 
harvesting of feed crops can be optimised; any decrease in 
average yields can be forecast and protection against pest 
mutation can also be improved with the help of artificial 
intelligence. 
Data-based, AI-supported optimisation of livestock and 
plant production, as well as forest management, can not 
only increase farmers’ incomes but also reduce harmful 
atmospheric emissions, as well as the damage caused by 
diseases and pests. 
In this context, an extensive awareness-raising campaign 
shall be launched regarding the importance of health data. 
In the context of the transformative programme, we shall 
integrate people’s instructions regarding their participation 
in experimental analyses with the help of their data wallets, 
together with checking the services available through 
analysis; and we shall develop a marketplace in which 
service providers qualified in accordance with the system to 
be developed as part of the implementation of the measure 
are pooled and supervised to enable easier orientation for 
citizens.
4.3.4    Data wallet and personalized services
Making it as easy as possible for citizens to control the secondary use of data that have been 
generated in relation to them and to benefit from such transactions.
The goal is to enable citizens to participate, as active 
and responsible actors, in the data economy where the 
secondary use of data takes place and to exercise their 
fundamental rights relating to the protection of personal 
data. To this end, they need to be enabled to dispose over 
data pertaining to them and to participate actively and 
securely in the secondary use of such data. 
In this context, we must make it possible for citizens – 
by applying the provisions laid down in the GDPR, with a 
particular focus on data portability (Article 20) – to easily 
and securely decide what analyses they wish to permit to 
be carried on data recorded about them under business 
contracts or data they have collected about themselves, 
and who and for what purposes they wish to make such 
data available depending on what considerations service 
providers offer them in exchange, in terms of financial 
re wards or services. To this end, it is paramount that 
citizens: 
• can keep records of the organisations, the data and the 
purposes regarding which they have granted their autho-
risations;
• can actually make data recorded in relation to them 
availab le to third persons;
• can easily specify the purposes for which their data can 
be used;
• can check that their data are actually used for the pur-
poses they have specified;
• are provided with services or financial rewards in ex-
change for the use of their data for the purposes they 
have specified;
• participate in the entire transaction at the level of ano-
nymity of their choice.
The purpose of the data wallet initiative is that both com-
panies and private entities are interested in partici pating – 
in a transparent way – in the data economy, providing all 
stakeholders with a regulated framework for maximising 
the benefits from the accumulation of the data assets, 
based on the progressive opportunities provided by the 
GDPR and the PSI II. 
44 45
4.3.5    AI-supported development of personal competences  
4.3.6    Automated administrative procedures in Hungarian
Developing personalised, data-driven, and digitally-assisted ways of learning to fully support 
individual learning paths.
Creation of language processing technology for the Hungarian language and incorporating its 
potential resources into the support service of public and private customer services, with the 
intention of safeguarding the Hungarian language and culture in the digital age.
This transformative programme is actually a triple frame-
work for developments in education using AI to facilitate 
personalised learning and to make sure that the entire 
education system is focused on the student as its most 
important participant. 
• One of the goals that need to be accomplished is 
creating a training recommendation service aligned to 
the individual’s objectives in life, based on the offering 
of public education, VET in higher education and in adult 
education, as well as the benefits in the labour market 
stemming from successful completion of such training 
(e. g. in terms of new positions and/or higher pay). The 
personalised training recommendation service is based 
on the extension – through the integration of admin-
istrative data – of the career tracking function currently 
in place in higher education and public edu cation, to VET 
and adult education.
• Another objective is to introduce an AI-based service 
providing support in the individual’s learning path in 
higher education. One form of this is providing recom-
mendations tailored to individual students on what 
courses they should take during the next semester 
of their studies in order to maximise the proportion of 
successfully completed studies. Another form is AI-
supported recommendation, in the adaptive online 
learning systems to be spread in higher education 
training programmes, concerning the next curriculum 
element based on previously completed studies, to 
promote their successful completion of studies. 
• A third form is the development of what is called a 
personal learning assistant, primarily in acquiring basic 
competences, for members of social groups facing 
disadvantages in the labour market. 
The aim is to create a language technology solution 
supporting the Hungarian language as well, one that can be 
integrated in all customer service processes in the way of 
“zero level support”, to facilitate administrative processes. 
The resulting technology will be key to preserving the 
Hungarian language culture as well. It may be set as an 
objective through the cooperation of all elements of the 
AI ecosystem that all customer service calls (state, public 
utility, telecommunication, bank, insurance etc.) are res-
ponded to by machines and that the major electronic 
per sonal assistant service providers (Siri, Alexa, Google 
Assistant, Cortana) are available in Hungarian, English 
language content would automatically be translated at the 
level of the major foreign languages and a widely usable 
Hungarian language technology module created. The 
resulting solutions may also become suitable for security 
and defence applications.
4.3.7    Energy networks focused on renewable sources of energy
Based on smart meters, the introduction of smart grid technologies and extensive forecasts and 
projections, more accurate scheduling for generating weather-dependent (and so hard to predict) 
renewables shall be possible, together with the operation of a power grid relying on them.
One of the key issues in the use of renewable energy 
sources is how fluctuating energy generation, determined 
by weather conditions, can be coordinated with growing 
and increasingly unpredictable consumption. Artificial 
intelligence can be used in the introduction of forecasting/
projection procedures and distribution mechanisms, which 
can increase the flexibility of energy distribution. A dynamic 
use of smart meters and remote-controlled energy storage 
units makes it possible to balance the energy storage 
capabilities of the entire system. The aim of the programme 
is to enable, with the help of AI, a shift to a future- and 
climate-proof form of energy use, making it possible to 
continuously increase the proportion of energy generated 
from renewable sources in the total amount of energy 
generated and consumed.
47
46
5
Annexes
Setting the data economy in motion
Measure Goal Responsible* Time frame
Development and operation of the 
data market
Connecting demand with supply in the market for legally marketable data. The 
marketplace is to function as a platform for controlled transactions ITM, AI Innovation Hub
Information level: 31.01.2021
Transaction level: 31.01.2023
Creation of a National Data Asset 
Agency (hereinafter “NAVÜ”)
Adequate utilisation of the public data assets.
To this end, supporting public bodies in possession of data assets, in keeping records 
of data inventories, in making them available for secondary use and in developing their 
business models. The organisation and the associated public data inventory will be put in 
place on the basis of the results of projects already completed, projects under way and 
projects planned to be launched in this particular field.
ITM, IM, NAIH, KSH
The organisations’ activities are to be commenced as 
commissioned, on: 01.10.2020
Launch of public data portal (with usable data content): 
31.03.2021
Open access to at least 100 data sets: 31.01.2022
Development of a public data inventory: 31.03.2021
Provision of public funding for 
free access to high value data 
asset inventories
Investments and revenue compensations required for open access to public data 
inventories ITM, NKFIH, KSH
Proposal for the decision to be made, based on impact 
assessment: 31.03.2021
making data set with great multiplier effect available: 
30.09.2021
5.1  Action plan 
I. Foundation pillars
AI value Frameworks
Setting the data 
economy in 
motion
Education, 
competence 
development 
and societal 
preparedness
Research, 
development 
 and innovation
Infrastructure 
development
Incentivising 
uptake
Regulatory 
and Ethical 
Framework
II. Sector specific focus areas
III. Transformative programmes
Research, development and innovation
Measure Goal Responsible Time frame
Establishing the National 
Laboratory for Artificial 
Intelligence (AI LAB) 
Establishing a consortium responsible for the cooperation in the academic sphere and 
for the conduct of harmonised AI research to meet the requirements of the market; 
establishment and operation of an organisation system and a partnership framework 
ensuring that innovation sources are utilised and leveraged
ITM - NKFIH Founding date of the consortium: 31.12.2020
Establishing the National 
Laboratory for Autonomous 
Vehicles
Harmonisation of research and development activities associated with autonomous vehicles 
and channelling these activities towards actual market demands ITM - NKFIH Founding date of the consortium: 31.12.2020
Support for the AI Innovation Hub   Building and development of an accelerator centre for start-ups engaging in the 
development of or using the achievements of AI ITM - NKFIH
Date of tender invitation: 31.12.2020
Date of publication of the funds: 31.07.2021
Attracting international AI 
research centres to Hungary Moving the AI development departments of companies relocating to Hungary in the country KKM, ITM Development of the programme and compilation of the 
brochure introducing Hungary: 30.04.2021
Incentivising uptake
Measure Goal Responsible Time frame
Establishing the Innovation Centre 
for Artificial Intelligence
Building technology training research and infrastructure marketplaces
Creation of a team responsible for the support of AI implementation measures specifically 
aimed at SMEs,
Promotion of AI in for SMEs
ITM Launching the Innovation Centre on the base of the AI 
Coalition: 01.04.2021 
Development of corporate 
advisory services based on 
artificial intelligence (chatbots)
Within the framework of the EDIOP 3.2.1-15 Modern Businesses Programme (MBP) already 
underway, the development of corporate advisory services based on artificial intelligence 
(chatbots) that are able to increase the scope of the digitally advanced enterprises or 
enterprises intending to become digitally advanced along with the support companies 
already involved. The development can be integrated with the planned voice-based artificial 
intelligence platform of the government.
ITM, MKIK
Supplementing* the priority project EDIOP 3.2.1-15 MBP 
until 31.12.2020, 
Realization of AI partial project until 30.03.2022
* Subject to consultation with the EDIOP - Managing Authority (IH) and the 
government decision regarding the amendment of the Annual Development 
Funds
Creation of a corporate AI 
experimental and support fund Provision of sources to test efficiency-enhancing potential based on AI-based technologies ITM - NKFIH Date of fund establishment: 31.07.2021 
Establishment of the Innovation 
Award for the Application of AI
Invitation for tender for awarding the best AI application projects for each category  
(size + industry) in an annual gala show. ITM - NKFIH Date of publication of the award: 31.07.2021 
Education, competence development and societal preparedness
Measure Goal Responsible Time frame
Making knowledge of AI 
technologies available to the 
wider society
General preparation in higher education
Preparation of the players of society and economy for leveraging the opportunities offered 
by AI and for the associated risk management, performed within the framework of higher 
education.
ITM 31.03.2022
General preparation in public education and vocational training EMMI, ITM 31.08.2021
A parent and child protection programme to raise awareness regarding the dangers of 
everyday use of AI and regarding the right use of the technology EMMI 31.08.2021
49
48
Education, competence development and societal preparedness
Measure Goal Responsible Time frame
AI Challenge
Training 100,000 people using internationally accredited online course material,
Raising awareness of 1 million people via interactive exhibitions, a website and online 
professional contents
ITM, AI Innovation Hub Start of challenge: 01.11.2020
Provision of expert capacity 
regarding the pertinent fields of 
specialisation
To make potential AI customers understand the technology and to enhance capacity 
regarding the management of the realisation process ITM, AI Innovation Hub 31.03.2021
Training experts in the priority sectors and public administration ITM, AI Innovation Hub, 
EMMI, BM 31.12.2021
Preparation to provide suitable specialised training for professions expected to emerge in 
the future ITM, AI Innovation Hub 31.12.2021
Development of teacher training in line with the pertinent provisions of the National Basic 
Curriculum and the framework curricula. ITM, EMMI 31.12.2022
Provision of a highly qualified expert capacity in higher education to facilitate AI 
developments
ITM, higher education 
insitutions 31.12.2022
Intensive use of AI technologies in the developments associated with data management in 
higher education
ITM, Education 
Authority, higher 
education insitutions
31.12.2022
Collection and cleansing of data, data disclosure management for the availability of the 
necessary data, capacity development of data engineer competencies ITM, AI Innovation Hub 31.12.2022
Preparation for future professions in higher education, promotion of career opportunities in 
public administration
ITM, BM – NISZ, 
Idomsoft Zrt., higher 
education insitutions
31.12.2021
Enhancing developer capacity, provision of continuous professional growth ITM, AI Innovation Hub 31.12.2021
Enhancing data specialist, developer and research expert capacity in higher education ITM, higher education 
insitutions 31.12.2022
Development of mathematical and 
IT competences
Enhancing high-level mathematical and IT researchers’ competencies for basic and applied 
research ITM, AI Innovation Hub 31.03.2021
Personalised learning methods Personalised learning methods (using AI technology) for supporting people exposed to the 
risks of falling behind in the labour market and for supporting the talented (HUF 0.5 billion)
ITM, EMMI, BM, AI 
Innovation Hub Development of the detailed project proposal: 31.12.2020
Infrastructure development
Measure Goal Responsible Time frame
Enhancing supercomputer 
capacities As of 2022, the availability of 5 petaflops HPC capacity in Hungary ITM, KIFÜ 31.03.2022
Development of Hungarian testing 
environments
Further development of testing environments, in particular connection to the European 
testing environment systems in the fields of self-driving vehicles, smart cities, agriculture 
and manufacturing
Encouraging international cooperation opportunities and provision of the necessary 
conditions
Network testing for PPRD and 5G purposes, testing the government-owned smart 
settlement platform and infrastructure
ITM, BM, ZalaZone
Accreditation of ZalaZone as a European testing 
environment: 31.03.2021
Accreditation of the agrarian model farms as a European 
testing environment: 31.03.2021
Development of infrastructure 
marketplace
Inventory of infrastructures
Development of an infrastructure request protocol 
Integration into AI marketplaces
ITM, KIFÜ, KSH
Inventory of infrastructures: 31.12.2021
Development request protocol: 31.12.2021
Integration into AI marketplaces: 28.02.2021
Hybrid cloud development for 
research purposes
Ensuring the availability of research hardware and software modules with cloud service 
providers,
Development of a masking system that is capable of the integrated provision of a 
development environment for researchers working with various types of clouds
ITM, KIFÜ, KSH Launch of hybrid cloud: 30.09.2021
Realisation of large computing 
capacity data centre 
developments, application of AI
Further development and creation of new operational, information security, optimisation 
and load distribution capabilities to support and supplement new capacities resulting from 
already existing capacities and further development
BM - NISZ 31.12.2025
Building an automated access 
control system to operate 
marketplaces
Implementation of a workload distributor and resource monitoring device to ensure optimal 
capacity use ITM, KIFÜ Start: 30.09.2022
51
50
Regulatory and Ethical Framework
Measure Goal Responsible Time frame
Building a comprehensive data 
management environment
Data asset regulation
- building the regulatory environment regarding general data assets
- regulatory framework system regarding public data
- building the financial and legal system of rules regarding data monetisation 
IM, ITM, NAIH, KSH 31.12.2020
General regulatory framework 
system regarding AI
- amending the general regulatory framework system to suit AI
- building the Hungarian regulatory environment
- connecting to the EU regulatory system and implementation
-  involvement in the legislative activities of the European Council and international 
organisations, implementation
IM, ITM, NAIH, KSH 30.06.2021
Development of the regulatory 
framework system regarding the 
AI sector
Building a comprehensive industry regulatory environment:
- Healthcare 
- Education
- Financial (bank) sector 
- Regulation of autonomous vehicle systems and their traffic rules
- Fields of sustainable development 
- Agriculture, food industry 
- Leveraging research data assets 
IM, EMMI, PM, ITM, 
AM, BM, HM, NAIH, 
KSH
30.06.2021
Drafting an AI code of conduct Creation of an ethical framework system ITM, AI Innovation Hub, 
IM, KSH 30.04.2021
Creation of the Artificial 
Intelligence Regulation and Ethics 
Knowledge Centre
Provision and coordination of a wide-ranging base of experts to support regulatory and 
ethics-related tasks. ITM, IM 30.10.2020
Manufacturing technologies
Measure Goal Responsible Time frame
Support for AI model projects Invitation for a tender to support the financing of especially useful model projects 
(optimisation of manufacture, identification of scrap, maintenance forecast, etc.) ITM - NKFIH Invitation for the project grant tender: 30.04.2021
Building of a manufacturing 
testing environment and 
integration into the EU
Building a testing environment capable of presenting manufacturing data analysis
Exhibition of model applications
Grant for circular/green manufacturing
ITM Setup of a test  and model environment: 30.06.2021
Data processing and data 
protection associated with 
manufacturing
Development of cyber and data protection in manufacturing
Implementation of data standardisation protocols to enable data analysis 
Introduction of manufacturing data in the data market
ITM, AI Innovation Hub
Cyber protection recommendations and standards: 
21.03.2021
Data market integration: on an ongoing basis
Maintenance of a manufacturing - 
AI research ecosystem
Cooperation with the AI LAB in key research topics
Introduction of players available in the ecosystem in the AI marketplace
Organisation of applied research and active organisation of an innovative value chain
ITM, AI LAB Specification of the AI LAB manufacture-research 
programme: 31.07.2021
Development of competences 
regarding the application of AI in 
manufacture 
As part of the nationwide campaign, organisation of manufacturing-specific training and 
case study compilations
Drafting a production readiness model
ITM, AI Innovation Hub
Completion of manufacturing-specific AI training material: 
30.04.2021
Drafting an AI readiness model in the field of 
manufacturing: 28.02.2021
I. Foundation pillars
II. Sector specific focus areas
III. Transformative programmes
Manufacturing
Healthcare
Agriculture
Public Administration
• Machine detection, machine recognition
• Intelligent Manufacturing, Logistics
• Language technology
• Reliable AI
• Anonymization
• Mathematical foundations of AI
• Logistics
• Transport
• Energy
Development of AI
Sectoral efficiency  
development
53
52
Healthcare
Measure Goal Responsible Time frame
Making available the existing 
health data assets and supporting 
AI research and innovation using 
such data assets
Creation of an infrastructure and organisation that supports leveraging healthcare data 
assets; creation of the pertinent legislation environment EMMI, BM, KSH Drafting a detailed action plan: 31.03.2021
Development of AI applications in 
the fields of prevention, screening 
and diagnostics 
I. imaging diagnostics, 
II. focused, preventive screenings based on the analysis of central files,
III. therapy and diagnostic decision support, 
IV. improving the efficiency of pharmaceutical research and support for in silico experiments
V. development of medical technology equipment
EMMI Drafting a detailed action plan: 31.03.2021
Introduction to medicine Introduction of existing applications to medicine (distribution of some own developments 
within the framework of pilot projects) EMMI Drafting a detailed action plan: 31.03.2021
Introduction to the supply process Distribution of AI applications suitable for implementation in daily supply processes EMMI Drafting a detailed action plan: 31.03.2021
AI support for capacity planning AI-supported capacity planning and administration support (e.g. HR, backup files, equipment 
capacity management) EMMI Drafting a detailed action plan: 31.03.2021
Agriculture
Measure Goal Responsible Time frame
Establishing an agricultural data 
framework system
Creation of a conscious data processing option for the entire farming community to support 
efficient technological and business decisions and to reduce red tape. 
Structured collection and analysis of plant-level and environmental data to allow the 
efficiency of government operations to be enhanced and to develop innovative enterprises 
providing services to data users or farmers. 
AM, KSH 2020-2023
Expediting land reparcelling 
processes by creating exchange 
chains
Creation of an AI-supported exchange chain allowing scattered land parcels to be reallocated 
next to each other based on agreed exchanges AM
System establishment: 30.06.2021
Exchange processes: 30.06.2022
Creation of a plot-based and 
data-driven farming consultancy 
service
Based on the data originating from meteorological and spatial images or local farming, 
establishing a central recommendation system and simple-to-implement, data-based 
advisory services
AM Launch of the advisory services: 30.06.2022
Public Administration
Measure Goal Responsible Time frame
Establishing an AI research 
cluster in public administration
Creating a research cluster focusing on the use of AI applications by public bodies and 
central supply BM 31.03.2022
Using AI for the automaton of 
public administration processes
Delivery of and support for chat-based digital one-stop-shop solutions
Automation of correspondence, chat and telephone communications with clients
Expansion of the scope of cases covered by process-automation enabling self-service
Establishment of client communication options through KIOSK terminals.
Development of automatic resolution adoption functions.
Development of data analysis and data processing solutions and extraction of information 
necessary for running errands or making decisions in a readable and understandable format.
Development of competences, training courses, continuation training
Provision of the necessary infrastructural environment.
BM - NISZ
Drawing up the detailed project proposal: 31.03.2021
Based on the project plan, the final deadline for 
completing individual activities and developments is 
01.10.2023
Introduction of control systems for 
use by law enforcement
Continued development of the Robocop programme
Development of border patrol systems, establishment and further development of a 
comprehensive identification system
Criminal prosecution and crime prevention relying on integrated data-based analyses
Development of support functions and the associated administration and legislative tasks
Using AI, mapping offender networks and further development of the graphical database
Introduction of existing AI technologies to the investigation process
Provision of speech-to-text, text-to-speech and language technology functions, system 
integration, analysis of digital documents and speech recorded during client communications 
using text mining tools, data processing
Automaton of manual data management and processing processes
Support for data management and -processing activities associated with documents
Development of competences, training courses, continuation training
Provision of the necessary infrastructural environment 
BM
Drawing up the detailed project proposal: 31.03.2021
Completion of the project: 31.03.2024
Standardisation activities in 
public and local government 
administration
Start of standardisation in the operation of public- and local government administrations, 
their implementation and support, identification of key areas, EU cooperation opportunities ITM, BM 31.03.2025
Development of complex 
modelling systems to simulate 
decision-making situations
Development of simulations required for modelling complex decision-making situations 
and the introduction of instruments enabling rapid response capabilities for the Disaster 
Management Authority, the Hungarian Defence Forces and law enforcement forces
BM, HM, MH Drawing up the detailed project proposal: 31.03.2021
Development of systems 
supporting the oversight of 
financial and tax processes
Pre-screening of items to be audited and implementation of process automation (software 
robots, language processing) to enhance the efficiency of SAO, NTCA and bank supervision 
processes
PM, BM, MNB, KSH Drawing up the detailed project proposal: 30.06.2021
Implementation of forecast-based 
maintenance processes
Introducing data-based malfunction forecasts and implementation of the indicated 
maintenance processes in order to develop the maintenance of movable and immovable 
public assets
ITM Drawing up the detailed project proposal: 30.09.2021
55
54
Public Administration
Measure Goal Responsible Time frame
Developing AI capabilities for 
military and national security 
purposes
Development of basic infrastructure for developing and running programmes,
Development and implementation of AI-based data collection- and processing systems,
AI-based support for the cyberspace used for military purposes.
KNBSZ Drawing up the detailed project proposal: 31.03.2021
Defence applications and 
developments
Automation of big data processing, synthetizing into information, information operations and 
decision preparation and support systems, 
Implementation and development of predictive supply systems, 
Autonomous systems in all relevant operational theatres (air, land, space), 
Development of human-machine cooperation from both sides
Protection against systems supported by AI
Modelling and simulation
Developments aimed at protecting and analysing the defence-related elements of the 
National Data Assets.
HM, MH Drawing up the detailed project proposal: 31.03.2021
Energy
Measure Goal Responsible Time frame
Integrating smart meters, 
developing the conditions and 
requisites for data-driven 
processes
Increasing the number of multi-time zone, flexible pricing services offered and used by 1 
million electricity users equipped with smart meters ITM 2030
Implementation of predictive 
maintenance and autonomous 
operation
Analysis of network data sets to predict the maintenance activities to be completed in energy 
public utility networks ITM Development of competences necessary to analyse big 
network data concerning maintenance by 2025
Logistics
Measure Goal Responsible Time frame
AI-based unification and 
standardisation
Initiating the standardisation of the solutions used for the identification of products and 
goods. ITM Drawing up the detailed project proposal: 31.05.2021
Integrated AI development of the 
fields associated with logistics
Integrated development of the interfacing areas through the supply chain/logistics (e.g. 
supplying  consumers, manufacturing systems, predictive maintenance) ITM Drawing up the detailed project proposal: 31.03.2021
Transport
Measure Goal Responsible Time frame
Extension of smart city concepts - 
traffic control, traffic management
AI-based, automatic traffic management to reduce traffic jams
Development of smart parking systems
Support for achieving the strategic traffic management and traffic policing policy objectives
ITM, BM Drawing up the detailed project proposal: 31.03.2021
Building a digital infrastructure 
facilitating the use of on-board 
data transmission devices
Integrated analysis of signal data originating from data transmission devices, recognition of 
data patterns, support for self-driving vehicles by improving V2V communication, enhancing 
traffic safety
ITM, ZalaZone Building a digital infrastructure 31.03.2022
Public transport developments Optimisation of urban public transport networks, passenger counts, journey optimisation ITM, BKK, MÁV, Volán Building a digital analytics platform: 30.09.2021
Self-driving vehicles – autonomous systems
Measure Goal Responsible Time frame
Building the infrastructure- and 
regulatory framework necessary 
for the operation of autonomous 
transportation systems
Harmonising domestic and EU legislative environments and traffic police regulations. 
Nationwide road development to contribute to the self-driving infrastructure ITM, BM Equipping single-digit road networks with self-driving 
infrastructure by 2025
Health consciousness in a digital world
Measure Goal Responsible Time frame
A campaign promoting the use of 
healthcare data
A campaign promoting awareness, own collection and responsible use of possible healthcare 
data using applications linked to the data wallet app EMMI, ÁEEK, ITM Start of the campaign: 31.03.2021
Opinions regarding the use of 
healthcare data
Adopting a legal opinion with regard to the options of secondary use of own or self-collected 
healthcare data EMMI, BM, ITM, KSH 31.12.2023
Assessment of activities of businesses engaging in illegal data management, assessment 
and deploying the tools of enforcement measures against these activities, reducing the 
number of information security incidents, enhancing data protection and integrity of data.
EMMI, ÁEEK, BM, ITM ongoing
Drafting of rating systems 
for healthcare data analytics 
applications
Mapping digital healthcare applications, developing rating criteria and monitoring processes, 
communicating the rated service providers EMMI, ÁEEK, ITM 30.06.2021
I. Foundation pillars
Self-driving 
vehicles – 
autonomous 
systems
Health 
consciousness in a 
digital world
Climate-driven 
agriculture
Data wallet and 
personalized 
services
AI-supported 
development 
of personal 
competences
Automated 
administrative 
procedures in 
Hungarian
Energy networks 
focused on 
renewable sources 
of energy
II. Sector specific focus areas
III. Transformative programmes
57
56
Climate-driven agriculture
Measure Goal Responsible Time frame
Preparing for the impacts of 
climate change and mitigating its 
adverse effects
Development and application of AI-based, optimisation solutions in terms of plant production 
and stock farming AM Drawing up the detailed project proposal: 31.12.2020
Implementation of predictive, AI-based analytics methods to improve water, soil and air 
quality to enhance the efficiency of management AM Drawing up the detailed project proposal: 31.12.2020
Data wallet and personalized services
Measure Goal Responsible Time frame
Development of the data wallet 
technology model
Development of software to support citizens in making statements regarding the use, sale or 
disclosure of their data to third parties in a one-stop-shop system.
Integration of Hungarian patents to allow fully anonymous accesses.
ITM
Preparation of the first demo model: 31.12.2020
Building the model providing full anonymity: 28.02.2022
Provision of legal oversight 
Management of measures monitoring requests granted under Art. 20 of the GDPR and 
managing the increasing legal redress requests
Issue of positions taken regarding the possibilities and recommended guidelines on 
compensations to be provided to service providers and citizens upon the disclosure of data 
collected by service providers
ITM, NHIT, NAIH
Issue of an official opinion on the expectations regarding 
data wallet compatibility: 31.12.2020
Recommendation on the distribution of the proceeds of 
data sales: 31.12.2020
Support for businesses present 
in the market for attaining 
compatibility with the data wallet
Establishment of a grant fund intended for market players (primarily for SMEs) ITM - NKFIH Completion of the tender concept: 30.06.2021
AI-supported development of personal competences
Measure Goal Responsible Time frame
AI-supported career advisory 
system
Development of the necessary files, expert activities, ensuring interoperability of file systems ITM, Education 
Authority Drawing up the detailed project proposal: 30.06.2021
Development of a personalised training recommendation service that is tailored to individual 
life objectives and based on public education, vocational training, tertiary vocational training 
and adult education offers, along with the labour market results attained by their completion
ITM, AI Innovation Hub Drawing up the detailed project proposal: 30.06.2021
Identification of learning path 
recommended in the training
Within the training, establishing a service offering training content or courses allowing the 
completion of a customised learning path ITM, AI Innovation Hub Drawing up the detailed project proposal: 30.06.2021
Learning assistant Development of a personal learning assistant, primarily for those who are exposed to the 
risks of falling behind in the labour market in terms of the acquisition of basic competences ITM, AI Innovation Hub Drawing up the detailed project proposal: 31.12.2020
Automated administrative procedures in Hungarian
Measure Goal Responsible Time frame
Collection of training datasets Collection of corpuses necessary for developing the processing of the Hungarian language by 
machines for both oral and written text materials ITM, BM Corpus compilation: 31.07.2021
Automaton of the multi-channel 
customer service processes 
used by nationwide telephone-
based customer services using AI 
solutions
AI support for human email, chat and voice communication BM - NISZ Launch of pilot: 31.03.2021
Support for implementation in 
customer services
Expansion to government administrative matters
Invitation for tenders for the development of AI-supported customer services and for building 
the 1818 Government Client Hotline and for cooperation regarding infocommunications
BM - NISZ, ITM - 
NKFIH Launch of wide-scale promotion: 31.12.2022
Energy networks focused on renewable sources of energy
Measure Goal Responsible Time frame
Implementation of Smartgrid 
technologies
Building upon smart meters, the implementation of smartgrid technologies and wide-scale 
forecasts, we shall facilitate the creation of a more accurate production timeline for weather-
dependent renewable energy sources and the operation of the energy network relying on it
ITM
Implementation of a new network development and 
network connection regulation by 2025 to support 
an efficient system integration of the production of 
renewable energy
*Note that in the above table the abbreviations and acronyms of responsible institutions are the Hungarian versions. 
The following table contains english translations for these.
Hungarian 
acronym/
abbreviation
Hungarian name English name
ÁEEK Állami Egészségügyi Ellátó Központ National Healthcare Service Center
AI LAB MI Nemzeti Labor AI National Lab
AM Agrárminisztérium Ministry of Agriculture
BKK Budapesti Közlekedési Központ Centre for Budapest Transport
BM Belügyminisztérium Ministry of Interior
EMMI Emberi Erőforrások Minisztériuma Ministry of Human Capacities
HM Honvédelmi Minisztérium Ministry of Defence
Idomsoft Zrt. Idomsoft Zrt. Idomsoft Ltd.
IM Igazságügyi Minisztérium Ministry of Justice
ITM Innovációs és Technológiai Minisztérium Ministry for Innovation and Technology
KIFÜ Kormányzati Informatikai Fejlesztési 
Ügynökség Governmental Information Technology Development Agency
KKM Külgazdasági és Külügyminisztérium Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade
KNBSZ Katonai Nemzetbiztonsági Szolgálat Military National Security Service
KSH Központi Statisztikai Hivatal Central Statistical Office
Hungarian 
acronym/
abbreviation
Hungarian name English name
MÁV Magyar Államvasutak Zrt. Hungarian State Railways
MH Magyar Honvédség Hungarian Defence Forces
MKIK Magyar Kereskedelmi és Iparkamara Hungarian Chamber of Commerce and Industry
MNB Magyar Nemzeti Bank Central Bank of Hungary
NAIH Nemzeti Adatvédelmi és 
Információszabadság Hatóság
National Authority for Data Protection and Freedom of 
Information
NISZ Nemzeti Infokommunikációs Szolgáltató 
Zrt.
National Infocommunications Services Ltd.  
(under Ministry of Interior)
NKFIH Nemzeti Kutatási, Fejelesztési és 
Innovációs Hivatal National Research, Development and Innovation Office
OH Oktatási Hivatal Educational Authority
PM Pénzügyminisztérium Ministy of Finance
Volán Volánbusz Közlekedési Zrt. VOLÁNBUSZ Transport Company Ltd. (100% state owned 
public transport provider)
ZalaZone ZalaZone zalaegerszegi tesztpálya ZalaZone Zalaegerszeg test track (proving ground for 
vehicular R&D)

